India in the Persianate Age: 1000–1765. By Richard Eaton. University of California Press; 512 pages; $39.95. Penguin; £12.99 The Language of History: Sanskrit Narratives of Indo-Muslim Rule. By Audrey Truschke. Columbia University Press; 376 pages; $140 and £108 IF CHINA’S LEADERS are driven by a desire to avenge a “century of humiliation” from the mid-19th to the mid-20th century, India’s Hindu nationalists lament “1,200 years of slavery”, mostly at the hands of successive Muslim rulers. It is time, believe India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, and his followers, for Hindus to take back control of the land that is rightfully theirs. Indians of all stripes agree that the British, who ruled for two centuries until 1947, were foreign colonisers. They came, they extracted and, to general relief, they left. Muslim rulers, by contrast, settled, intermarried and effectively became Indian. The idea that they were Islamic invaders bent on subjugating Hindus was a convenient British invention. Mr Modi’s innovation is to cast the 200m-odd Muslims in India today as heirs to this religiously driven agenda. It is a seductive argument, as the hundreds of millions of voters devoted to the prime minister and his Bharatiya Janata Party have demonstrated in election after election over the past seven years. Yet it is rooted in a narrow view of India that denies not only the country’s 21st-century diversity but also the dynamism, cosmopolitanism and intellectual curiosity of a people who for centuries have intermingled with the world beyond the subcontinent. A useful corrective, then, comes in the form of Richard Eaton’s “India in the Persianate Age: 1000-1765”, which at around 500 pages is an admirably concise distillation of eight centuries of Indian history. Mr Eaton, a distinguished American historian of Islam in India, argues that religion is an unhelpful lens through which to understand India in the second millennium. More appropriate is culture, specifically “the prolonged and multifaceted interaction between the Sanskrit and the Persianate worlds”. What these worlds shared in common was an absence of fixed boundaries, linguistic leadership, or affiliation with a particular sovereign. Sanskrit was the language of intellectual discourse, literature and, often, the state in India, as well as in South-East Asia, where its echoes can still be found in the names of islands, cities and kings. Persian similarly functioned as an administrative and literary lingua franca in Central Asia, and was used as a second language all along the Silk Road. Marco Polo used it on his travels, as did Ibn Batutta. Just as the English language loosely knits the world together with common cultural touchstones—American movies and British novels, for instance—so did Persian and Sanskrit create transregional cultural spheres. India was where the two met. Mr Eaton provides ample evidence of foreign kings attempting to integrate themselves into the Indian understanding of kingship and geopolitics. From the very first Muslim dynasties of any note on the subcontinent, invading rulers made sure to establish continuity with the Hindu kings they replaced. The Ghaznavids in the 11th and 12th centuries issued currency with Hindu symbols and Sanskrit phrases. The Ghurids who followed minted coins with Arabic calligraphy in their mostly Muslim territories of present-day Afghanistan, and Hindu iconography in their eastern districts. Nor did Sanskrit-speaking Indians, for their part, see the invaders through a religious lens. Terms used to refer to the outsiders were mlechha (barbarian) and turushka (Turk) rather than “Muslim”. As the cultures mixed, Persian practices and symbols became integrated into Indian ones. Consider the chatr, or umbrella, a Persian symbol of imperial authority. It can still be found today in the flag of Jaisalmer, a Hindu Rajput former kingdom in Rajasthan, and in the honorific given to Shivaji, the Maratha warrior of western India. Mumbai’s airport is named after Chhatrapati Shivaji—literally, “parasol-lord Shivaji”. These dynasties rose and fell over the centuries, from the first sultanates that emerged from the ashes of the Ghurids, through successor states up and down the country, all the way to the bejewelled empire of the Mughals. What remained constant: Sanskrit-speaking Brahmins intellectuals serving in the rulers’ courts, Kshatriya warriors folded into the rulers’ armies, and rulers picking up Indian customs even as they seeded Persian ones. That is all very well. But what did Indian intellectuals make of all this syncretism? A useful companion to Mr Eaton’s book is “The Language of History” by Audrey Truschke, a Sanskritist and historian. While Mr Eaton tells a more-or-less straight history, Ms Truschke investigates how one culture was received by the other. She approaches the “intersection between an elite learned tradition (Sanskrit thought) and a disruptive set of political changes (Indo-Muslim rule)” through analysis of a few dozen Sanskrit texts written between the 1190s and 1721. Her conclusion is that Sanskrit intellectuals had multifarious ways of categorising people, including by place of origin, residence, caste, class and more, but rarely by religion. Adhering to certain standards of kingship was often more important than religion, and political power trumped all other considerations. At the heart of both books is the central question of identity. India today is in the midst of redefining what it means to be Indian, often using, as in Mr Modi’s formulation of “1,200 years of slavery”, a bastardised version of the past to justify discrimination in the present. That makes Mr Eaton’s and Ms Truschke’s latest contributions to the study of Indo-Muslim rule all the more valuable. A theme that appears repeatedly in both books is the sheer diversity of modes of rule, of loyalties, of motivations and, above all, of peoples on the subcontinent. This is only to be expected in a country as vast and varied as India. That it bears repeating is a commentary on how monolithic the country’s vision of itself is becoming.