The Aristocracy of Talent: How Meritocracy Made the Modern World. By Adrian Wooldridge. Allen Lane; 496 pages; £25. To be published in America in July by Skyhorse; $24.99 THIS MASTERLY book offers a robust defence of meritocracy. Adrian Wooldridge, The Economist’s political editor, traces the idea from Plato’s “Republic”, through Napoleon’s “career open to talent” to the attack on Victorian nepotism led by Britain’s intellectual aristocracy. He ends with interesting speculation that meritocracy may now have better prospects in Asia than in the West. The term “meritocracy” was coined by Michael Young, a British sociologist, in a book published in 1958. Young feared that a system that rewarded merit—defined as IQ plus effort—could actually be dystopian because the losers would suffer more than ever. He predicted a revolt against it and that revolt is indeed under way, with powerful challenges from critics including Daniel Markovits, a professor at Yale Law School, and Michael Sandel, a political philosopher at Harvard Law School. Such detractors do not see why the accident of cognitive skill should yield such status for individuals. Mr Wooldridge recognises the power of the argument that “meritocracy offers upward mobility for the few at the expense of the continued degradation of the many.” Those who prevail believe their success is justified by their personal merit; those who fail have “nobody to blame for their failures but themselves”. This is what makes meritocracy harder to embrace than its close relatives, social mobility or equality of opportunity. The book makes the moral case for meritocracy as a system but Mr Wooldridge does not argue that the individual beneficiaries of it are somehow better. That is what makes meritocracy so unappealing and what he shrewdly, silently abandons. Much of Mr Wooldridge’s case is really about the value of getting the right people into the right jobs. It is easier to persuade people that everyone gains if doctors, scientists and even journalists are hired based on their aptitude for the role. The most powerful chapter in the book is about how meritocracy has been “corrupted” in Britain and America as more and more institutions supposed to spread opportunity—including schools and prestigious universities—are instead captured by the advantaged. Mr Wooldridge criticises the assault on these institutions from the left; in one chapter he discusses the left-wing critique of the 11-plus (an exam which determines admission to grammar and other selective secondary schools in England and Northern Ireland). But even more intense is the pressure from the well-off, wary of the disruptive power of true meritocracy. Peter Mandler’s recent history, “The Crisis of the Meritocracy”, uncovered the opposition from Conservative councils to a system in which middle-class sons and daughters might not automatically get places at good schools and the efforts those councils made to ensure that the class system remained intact. Mr Wooldridge recognises that schools and universities can act as replicators of privilege. The golden age of grammar schools in the mid-to-late-20th century, as celebrated in Alan Bennett’s “The History Boys” (pictured), also saw a surge in white-collar jobs. Research by John Goldthorpe, a British sociologist, suggests there was no improvement in social mobility other than that resulting from changes in occupational structure. There are limits to what education can do. The economic backdrop matters. One reason why meritocracy is under threat today is that inherited wealth matters more. Assets used to be worth three times annual British GDP—but in a generation they have increased to seven times GDP. This makes it harder to acquire wealth from earnings and makes inherited parental wealth more important. Such economic changes challenge meritocracy, unlike the (albeit sometimes clunky and intrusive) proposals to make schools and universities as open as possible to talented young people who are losing out in the parental arms race of investment in their children. The battle for meritocracy is never won. LORD WILLETTS* *Our policy is to identify the reviewer of any book by or about someone closely connected with The Economist. Lord Willetts is president of the Resolution Foundation. His book, “A University Education”, is published by Oxford University Press