Motley Stones. By Adalbert Stifter. Translated by Isabel Fargo Cole. New York Review Books; 288 pages; $17.95 and £14.99 THE AUTHOR of these stories was an Austrian bureaucrat, known locally as a modest chronicler of bucolic idylls. Yet his characters include children who see Christ in a snowstorm; a macrocephalic girl who hides underground with a pet jackdaw; a pair of youngsters who survive a plague that kills everyone around them; and a sexually repressed priest who, by an act of self-sacrifice, saves his blithely uncomprehending parishioners. Misunderstood in his lifetime, largely forgotten since, this enigmatic writer also anticipated the modern preoccupation with environmental disaster. His name is Adalbert Stifter. Stifter—you can be forgiven for never having heard of him—was the son of a linen-weaver from a rural backwater in what today is the Czech Republic. A contemporary of Charles Dickens, Gustave Flaubert and Nikolai Gogol, he spent most of his life as a schools inspector, cut off from the wider currents of European literature. His first published story, which won him local acclaim, appeared in 1840, the last in 1869, a year after his suicide. His output included two huge novels and 30 “novelles” (short novels or long short stories). He is still read in Austria and Germany but is almost unknown in the English-speaking world. Half his stories have not been translated. “Motley Stones”, one of his best collections, is only now appearing in English. Many of his tales are set in Bohemian forests and focus on children. In a preface to “Motley Stones”, Stifter described the book as “an assortment of fancies for young hearts” and himself as an imaginer of “only small things”. In his lifetime he was seen as a narrator of domestic harmony, family life and landscapes (which, as in the picture, he also painted): “The Sound of Music” minus the Nazis. A contemporary dismissed him as a writer of “beetles and buttercups”. Politics influenced this view. Austria had one of the most conservative and repressive regimes in Europe and Stifter, who tutored the son of the chancellor, Prince von Metternich, was associated with the state. Order, forbearance and self-denial are key ideas in his work. Yet this perception of his stories is utterly at odds with what they actually contain. Stifter claimed he was teaching readers to value family ties, but in “Motley Stones” and elsewhere his families mainly produce misery and heartache. One child is so starved of affection that he dresses a boot-jack as a teddy bear and cuddles it. A mother finds her baby daughter repulsive: “When she cried, no one saw to her needs. If she did not cry, she was left to lie there.” A son is pampered and petted for years until abruptly driven into the desert and told to earn his living. Stifter may have wanted to preach pious domesticity but hardship, solitude and horror kept breaking through. His death was more in keeping with his work than his life had been. Suffering from cirrhosis of the liver, Stifter took to his bed, slashed his throat with a razor and died three days later. As Isabel Fargo Cole, the translator of “Motley Stones”, remarks in her introduction, he is less a writer of idylls than of “the abyss in the idyll”. The tension between what he claimed he was writing and what he actually wrote generates a singular and unsettling suspense. Over time, German-speaking readers and writers reappraised Stifter’s work. Franz Kafka, that master of the uncanny, identified him as an artistic brother. Thomas Mann called him “one of the most extraordinary, the most enigmatic, the most secretly daring and most strangely gripping narrators in world literature”. Today, Stifter can be seen as one of the first authors to engage seriously with the theme of environmental catastrophe. Characteristically, he disavowed any such intention, claiming in the preface to “Motley Stones” that he was less interested in “the surging of the sea” or “the fire-spewing mountain” than in “the force that makes the milk in the poor woman’s pot swell and boil over”. Yet of the six stories, four are about hailstorms, blizzards, plagues and floods. Storms are common in literature, often as projections of a hero’s inner turmoil. But in Stifter’s narratives, storms do not represent anyone’s interior drama. They are the drama. He eschews the type of hero who comes into conflict with others and changes the world; in the story “Tourmaline”, in which a character’s flat is decorated with pictures of the Viennese aristocracy, the great men of history are literally reduced to wallpaper. Rather, Stifter’s protagonists are trapped by the forces of nature or the minutiae of social life. In his world, the normal balance between background setting and foreground drama is upended. Among German readers he has been celebrated for his long lyrical descriptions of nature, with each path, tree or boulder depicted in almost obsessive detail. Hannah Arendt called him the greatest landscape painter in literature. His characters, though, seem overshadowed and overcome by their surroundings. W.G. Sebald, another of Stifter’s admirers, thought that he took the Romantic era’s evocation of nature as an indifferent, destructive force as far as it could go. In “Rock Crystal”, for example, the story in which the siblings see Christ, an icy blizzard dominates the narrative, and the miracle happens almost in passing. According to Amitav Ghosh, an Indian novelist, one reason climate change rarely features in Western literature is that it is too fundamental a challenge to the Western belief in a rational, predictable world. In the case of Stifter, at least, that is not true. As Ms Cole points out, even in its human aspects his world is neither predictable nor rational. Confused and overwhelmed, his characters struggle to cope with environmental disasters that they do not understand—in stories written before global warming had even begun. ■