IN THE 1970S the fortunes of the world economy, in all its unfathomable complexity, seemed to turn on one product: oil. Exported by a narrow clique of countries, this vital input was hostage to ferocious political forces. Today the world’s economic prospects similarly depend on another all-important input, vaccines, which are also narrowly produced, delicately political—and unevenly distributed. Widespread vaccination is helping America to boom, pushing core inflation to its highest rate since 1992. But delays in buying, making and deploying shots have left much of the world vulnerable to new virus outbreaks and economic setbacks. On June 16th America’s Federal Reserve raised its forecast for growth, inflation and interest rates, noting the country’s vaccine progress. The median Fed official now expects two rate hikes in 2023. The change of tone was enough to increase bond yields both in America and in economies on the other side of the vaccine divide. The global economy should grow briskly this year: by 5.6%, according to the World Bank, which also updated its forecasts this month. But it is a “tale of two recoveries”, says the bank’s Ayhan Kose. Rich countries, many of which have vaccinated people relatively quickly, are enjoying, in Dickensian terms, a spring of hope and so on. But where vaccination has lagged, especially in poor countries, some economies seem to be going direct the other way. The divide between the jabs and jab-nots is visible even in a simple comparison of vaccination rates and growth forecasts (see chart). Among the big economies highlighted by the World Bank, the ten with the highest vaccination rates are forecast to grow by 5.5% this year on average. The ten with the lowest are set to grow by just 2.5%. The divide also shows up in forecast revisions. Thanks to America’s pace of inoculation (as well as the scale of its stimulus), its projected growth for 2021 was revised upwards from 3.5% to 6.8% since the World Bank last released its forecasts in January. Emerging economies that have vaccinated faster than their peers have also enjoyed large upgrades. On the other side of the divide, the picture is far more chequered. In the world’s poorest 29 economies (including 23 countries in sub-Saharan Africa), only 0.3% of the population has received even one dose of vaccine. This group’s growth prospects have deteriorated. Their combined GDP is set to grow by 2.9% this year (not 3.4% as forecast six months ago). That would be their second-worst performance in the past two decades. Their worst was last year. Vaccination helps growth in at least two ways. It allows countries to relax lockdowns or any other restrictions on social interaction that are still inhibiting the economy. And in places like New Zealand that have already lifted such measures, it reduces the risk of a future outbreak, making growth more resilient. Goldman Sachs, a bank, has calculated an “effective lockdown index” that combines a tally of policy measures with data on mobility drawn from mobile phones. It shows that social hustle and bustle has returned to many countries with high vaccination rates. As the pace of inoculation picks up, others will join them. Indeed, the countries most likely to outperform over the next few months, says Goldman Sachs, are those that are simultaneously making rapid progress in achieving immunity yet still labouring under social restrictions. They have yet to feel the benefit of relaxing restrictions, but will soon do so. In this kind of country timely economic data are still depressed by social curbs that will ease given the pace of vaccination. In other countries, however, such as Taiwan, new outbreaks of covid-19 have yet to show up fully in mainstream economic indicators, which remain strong. The “nowcast” model of JPMorgan Chase, which uses monthly data to predict where the economy is today shows Taiwan growing at an annual pace of about 9% in the second quarter. But the bank thinks that Taiwan’s economy will in fact have shrunk over that period. In the euro area, by contrast, JPMorgan expects vaccinations to have lifted growth this quarter to over 7% at an annual pace. The bank’s nowcast model, however, is predicting growth of less than 3%. Given the importance of the global vaccine gap, it is worth asking how quickly it is closing. Japan, South Korea, Brazil, Turkey and Mexico will each get at least one shot into the arms of half their population by August, reckons Goldman. South Africa and India will not reach that benchmark until December. In both of those countries, however, many people have already recovered from the virus, giving them some level of natural immunity. Michael Spencer of Deutsche Bank thinks that India, for example, could reach a 70% immunity level in less than nine months, counting everyone who has had either a past infection or a first shot of a vaccine. An uneven recovery is better than none. But the strength of some countries’ growth could create problems for other parts of the world. America’s boom, for example, has pushed its own consumer prices up by 5% in May, compared with a year earlier, and could also add to price pressure elsewhere, forcing central banks to respond. Brazil, for example, has raised interest rates sharply this year. On June 11th Russia’s central bank also tightened for the third time since March. Its governor, Elvira Nabiullina, cited both vaccination rates and “extremely loose monetary and fiscal policies in major economies” as reasons behind the increase in Russian prices. She worries that higher inflation in Russia and elsewhere may prove more persistent than “perceived at first glance”. Even temporary inflation could unsettle financial markets, making investors doubt the Fed’s commitment to easy money. That could increase the risk premium emerging markets pay on their borrowing. “We are not necessarily worried about inflation,” says Mr Kose, whose team forecasts a rise in global inflation from 2.5% last year to 3.9% in 2021. “But we are worried about how these inflationary pressures can complicate policymaking” in emerging markets, especially those with large amounts of foreign-currency debt. Policymakers in these countries fear a repeat of the “taper tantrum” in 2013, when the Fed’s talk about reducing (or “tapering”) its asset purchases led to an abrupt rise in American bond yields and a painful sell-off in emerging-market assets. At its meeting on June 15th-16th, the Fed began discussing an eventual tapering, but the timing of such a move remains uncertain. Global inflation this year will remain a far cry from the double-digit rates experienced in the stagflationary 1970s. But just as the oil crisis back then forced policymakers into awkward dilemmas, obliging them to raise interest rates in the face of economic weakness, this year’s vaccine shortage could create similar discomfort for them. The price of uneven vaccination may be premature austerity and monetary tightening in some unprotected parts of the world. Countries that jab too late may have to hike too soon. ■ A version of this article was published online on June 13th 2021.