Ethel Rosenberg. By Anne Sebba. St Martin’s Press; 320 pages; $28.99. Weidenfeld & Nicolson; £20 ON JUNE 19TH 1953, just minutes after the execution of her husband, Julius, for espionage, 37-year-old Ethel Rosenberg was strapped into the electric chair in Sing Sing prison in New York. The first three charges of electricity failed to kill her, but after two more she was dead, smoke rising from her head, the only woman executed in America in the 20th century for a crime other than murder. Thousands of people filled the streets around the chapel in Brooklyn where the couple’s funeral was held. There were demonstrations across Europe, especially in France. For many on the left, the execution of the Rosenbergs on charges of spying for the Soviet Union—and passing on atomic secrets—was analogous to the Dreyfus affair in France half a century earlier. In the grip of McCarthyite anti-communist hysteria, this interpretation ran, America had sent an idealistic Jewish couple with two young children to their deaths on trumped-up evidence. The doomed pair protested their innocence until the end. In the case of Julius, this was never a convincing narrative. He had recruited his brother-in-law, David Greenglass, who was employed on the top-secret Manhattan project at Los Alamos, to the Soviet cause; Greenglass in turn was linked to Harry Gold, the courier for Klaus Fuchs (a much more significant source of intelligence for the Kremlin). Those latter three all confessed to spying. But the evidence against Ethel was far weaker, and at the trial was based primarily on perjured testimony from Greenglass, who had secured a plea deal, and his wife, Ruth. Greenglass later admitted his crucial testimony—that Ethel had typed up notes on American nuclear-weapons technology in the Rosenbergs’ flat in September 1945—had been false. Ruth, who escaped even a prison sentence, was probably the typist. There have been many books about the Rosenberg affair. J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI’s director, called theirs the trial of the century. But Anne Sebba’s biography of Ethel is the first for 30 years. She places great weight on the release in 2015, after Greenglass’s death, of grand jury testimony including his original statement that Ethel had no involvement in the conspiracy. With access to an extensive archive of Ethel’s letters, many movingly written from prison—and drawing together interviews with surviving witnesses, including the Rosenbergs’ two sons, Michael and Robert—Ms Sebba tells a compelling story of love, betrayal, misplaced idealism and brutal legal and political manoeuvring. The picture of Ethel that emerges is of a tough, clever autodidact and would-be opera singer growing up in genteel poverty with an indifferent mother. She becomes a union activist, a committed communist and then a passionate wife and over-anxious parent. The victim of serial betrayals herself, she puts the principle of loyalty to her husband and the communist cause above all else, even though co-operating with her accusers would have saved her life and stopped her children becoming orphans. It is impossible not to sympathise with her terrible plight, but she is by no means a wholly attractive figure. There is something of the fanatic about her. Was she innocent, at least morally, as the author maintains? The answer is probably not. In 1995 the American government released a cache of documents decrypted by the Venona project, a second-world-war counter-intelligence operation that intercepted messages from Soviet intelligence sources, which continued into the cold war. The material provides powerful evidence that Julius was indeed the linchpin of a prolific spy ring that gave Joseph Stalin’s Soviet Union a valuable trove of military secrets. It seems inconceivable that Ethel was not fully aware of his activities; she probably helped him, including in recruiting her brother and Ruth. But that does not legitimate her trial and execution. Crucial evidence was withheld from the defence. One of the prosecutors was the young Roy Cohn, who went on to work for Joe McCarthy and Donald Trump; his role in securing perjured witness testimony, and in secretly pushing the judge into handing down the death penalty, was disgraceful. The Venona evidence was never submitted and was anyway ambiguous about Ethel’s involvement. Government lawyers knew their case was flimsy but thought that, if they threatened Ethel with execution, she would put pressure on Julius to reveal his network. They did not want to kill a young mother. As William Rogers, the deputy attorney-general, admitted, “She called our bluff.” Ms Sebba rightly sees this as a great miscarriage of justice. But in exculpating Ethel almost entirely, she goes too far. ■