IN THE 1990S parodies of Clippy from Microsoft Word were a bit of a trend in cartoons and magazines. The annoying paper-clip-shaped figure would pop up as soon as you began writing “Dear…” and say: “It looks like you’re writing a letter,” before offering unsolicited advice on things such as formatting. Two decades later, various automatic aids to writing, including spelling and grammar-checkers, are much better. They are both more discerning—powered by artificial intelligence rather than manually programmed—and more subtle in their operations. Many writers are grateful for their interventions. But now tech companies are wading into trickier waters. In 2020 Google’s internal style guide was updated, encouraging developers to eschew “unnecessarily gendered language” in their documentation. Rather than referring to “man hours”, for example, a coder might discuss the “person hours” involved in a project. “All of mankind” could be replaced with “all of humanity”, the guide’s authors suggested. On May 18th the company announced that it was going further in its promotion of inclusive language. Google Docs, its popular free word-processing software, would soon be nudging people away from potentially sexist language, such as the generic use of “chairman”. Instead it will offer gender-neutral suggestions including “chairperson”. The tech company is right to see a problem. Though it doesn’t fit in the same category as spelling errors or grammatical quandaries, sexist bias is shot through the English language, as well as others. Consider the lack of female equivalent for “master” that lacks unpleasant secondary meanings. “Slut” and “whore” are the types of slurs so gendered they are rarely hurled at men. Google’s target, though, is the so-called generic masculine. For a long time English-language traditionalists said that “the masculine includes the feminine”. Under this rule, “everyone has his own opinion” is gender-neutral, and there is nothing wrong with generic chairmen, airmen and firemen. (In other languages, mixed or unknown persons are referred to in the masculine, too.) But using words like “chairman” and “sex-neutral ‘he’” are not truly gender-neutral: a stack of research proves that when people read those terms they are much more likely to picture a man than a woman. In some European countries, feminists have called for feminised job titles, so that a woman president in Spain is now “la presidenta” and not “el presidente”. But Anglophone feminists have argued the other way, abjuring rather than recommending specific, feminised titles like poetess and actress. And this does not solve the problem of what to do with a generic referent, where languages still tend to default to the masculine. A solution in English is to prefer newer, genderless titles like “mail carrier” and “police officer”. But even here there are difficulties. Some titles seem especially ugly in this form: no one seems to love (and therefore want to adopt) “chairperson” and even though “chair” is fine for some observers, others cannot see past the piece of furniture. There is further disagreement over whether such forms should be universal or whether it is acceptable to call a male officer a “policeman”. With this much unsettled, tech companies are walking a difficult line. There is growing acceptance that sexist language is a problem; at the same time, there is also a widespread belief that the tech giants are becoming too powerful, and are making policy decisions that are momentous in users’ daily lives without enough clarity or insight into how those decisions were reached. All big companies are under increasing pressure not just to sell their widgets but to take a stance on the hot-button issues of the day. Often they find that trying to please one constituency outrages another; trying later to split the difference outrages the first one again, and so on. Companies that make coffee machines or shoes have already run into these problems. When the tech giants weigh in on politics, their huge influence virtually guarantees a backlash from one party or another. There are good things tech companies can do for inclusivity: at the same conference at which the language changes were announced, Google said it would improve its smartphone cameras’ handling of black and brown skin. But in language, the solutions are less obvious—even among people who agree on the problem.