THE PANDEMIC could have been terminal for Revolut, a firm set up in 2015 to help travellers avoid hefty foreign-exchange fees. Instead its latest annual results, released on June 21st, suggest the London-based digital bank is thriving. Despite slashing its marketing budget, it gained 4.5m customers in 2020, bringing the total to 14.5m. Its revenues grew by 57% to £261m ($362m); it was profitable in the last two months of 2020. A $580m fundraising round, completed in July, made it one of Europe’s most valuable private fintechs, worth $5.5bn. It helps that the firm has diversified away from colourful debit cards and multi-currency e-wallets to include services such as stock and cryptocurrency trading, business accounts and payments, and even credit. Today interchange fees from debit cards and the like represent just 36% of its revenues, little more than what it earns from selling subscriptions to perks like cheap phone insurance. Eventually Revolut, known for its iconoclastic style and self-confidence, would like to become “the first truly global financial superapp”. As fintechs have offered services provided by banks, people’s finances have fragmented over many apps, says Nik Storonsky, Revolut’s boss (pictured). The firm aims to be a great “rebundler”, offering every financial product one might need in a single account accessible across the world. It has applied for banking licences in Britain, America and Australia to offer loans (it already does in Europe) and is planning launches in Asia and Latin America. It now operates in 35 countries. Giants with vastly more resources, such as Square in America or Grab in Asia, also want to become financial-services platforms. But Revolut fans argue it has rare assets. One is its ability to offer international payments and currencies to everyone at a rate once reserved for big companies, which helps lure city dwellers and small exporters. Another is a reputation for being quick to build new products. Yet even if that suffices to turbocharge its growth, Revolut’s ability to make durable profits remains unproven. Its monthly performance since late 2020 owes partly to a surge in crypto trading (Revolut charges 1.5% per transaction) and prices (which has lifted the value of its crypto holdings). Over the year it actually lost £168m, up from £107m in 2019. To get properly in the black Revolut must lower its customer-acquisition costs. Fully fledged superapps, like MercadoLibre in Latin America or WeChat in China, have achieved this by selling financial products to members of their non-financial networks (the former is an e-commerce platform, the latter a messaging app). But Revolut lacks such a network. It could also try to increase its revenue per customer by selling them more stuff. That, however, would require it to develop more sophisticated products, says Ronit Ghose of Citigroup, a bank. Few of its richer customers, for example, would ditch their broker unless Revolut could provide access to more stocks than the 800-odd it offers today. But perhaps the firm’s lofty goal should not be taken entirely at face value. A British banker notes that the superapp story may be designed to attract investors and would-be corporate acquirers. Both have shown an appetite for British-based fintech. On June 17th Wise, a cross-border payments startup, announced plans to go public in London and JPMorgan Chase, an investment-banking titan, agreed to buy Nutmeg, a digital asset manager. The great financial rebundling may well end up involving some familiar institutions. ■