A CENTURY AFTER it ended, stories about the first world war have at last begun to reflect the conflict’s name. In history, fiction and film, the contribution of both fighting soldiers and behind-the-lines workers from African and Asian countries colonised by the European powers has belatedly come to the fore. On June 2nd, the award of the International Booker Prize for fiction confirmed this shift of perspective. The £50,000 ($71,000) annual prize, divided equally between the winning author and translator, went to “At Night All Blood is Black” by David Diop (pictured), a French author and academic, and Anna Moschovakis, an American translator. Mr Diop, who was born in Paris but grew up in Senegal and now teaches French literature at the University of Pau and the Adour Region, enters the mind of a Senegalese infantryman in the French army posted to the western front. Around 200,000 tirailleurs (riflemen) from French West Africa took part in the war. Many units fought with exceptional bravery in the bloodiest battles, such as the Gallipoli campaign of 1915. The novelist seeks to understand the trauma that can turn a trusting youngster from an African village into a killing machine and the aftermath of terrors both inflicted and endured. His narrator, Alfa Ndiaye, recounts his youth sheltered by the customs and beliefs of rural Senegal and his descent into fear and frenzy. Ripped from family and community, Alfa enters the hell of mechanised warfare where in order to survive he must “disobey the laws of humanity”. The death of his inseparable childhood friend and “more-than-brother” Mademba pushes Alfa over the edge. His comrades start to regard him as “a sorcerer, a devourer of people’s insides, a dëmm” (demon) as his vengeful fury frightens his own side as well as the Germans’. Novels and memoirs of the Great War’s dehumanising horror have been familiar to European readers since the 1920s, when works such as Henri Barbusse’s “Under Fire” and Erich Maria Remarque’s “All Quiet on the Western Front” rapidly acquired the status of classics of the carnage. Yet the special suffering of colonial troops, thrust into an alien slaughterhouse thousands of miles from home, remained for decades largely invisible in the literary and historical record. Works such as “The World’s War” by David Olusoga, a British-Nigerian historian, have lately addressed that forgetting. As Mr Diop’s novel shows in his narrator’s visceral, visionary testimony, industrialised massacre and colonial ideology combined to lay a peculiarly heavy burden on African combatants. France’s Senegalese units were at the same time praised and cursed as ferocious “tribal” warriors. “The captain’s France needs our savagery,” muses Alfa, “and because we are obedient…we play the savage”. Branded as primitive butchers to terrify the enemy, African troops also had to endure the condescending rhetoric of commanders and propagandists who treated them as meek, dutiful children of empire. Then came the shock of trench warfare itself. Mr Diop, whose novel has already won awards including the Prix Goncourt des Lycéens in France and Italy’s Premio Strega Europeo, conveys the overwhelming impact of wartime trauma on a bewildered young man in lyrical language, translated by Ms Moschovakis into rhythmic and dynamic English prose.