EVEN AS A child, Arthur Brand was fascinated by art and antiquities. His grandfather went to school with Han van Meegeren, a Dutch painter who forged a picture by Johannes Vermeer and sold it to Hermann Göring. His father had a passion for history and named his son after King Arthur, the mythical British ruler. In boyhood Mr Brand delighted in stories of knights and Vikings, of mummies and hidden troves of gold, silver and jewels. “The only book I read was ‘Treasure Island’,” he says. As a young adult, the object of Mr Brand’s obsession was “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly”. While studying in Spain he learned that the Spaghetti Western was shot in a nearby village. When he visited the place, people were digging for coins (much as they do in the film, the plot of which revolves around a cache of Confederate gold). He soon became an amateur collector, beginning with ancient currencies before moving on to artworks. He shelled out for a piece he thought was by Paul Madeline, a French post-Impressionist painter, but technical analysis revealed it was a fake, produced decades after the artist’s death. “These motherfuckers,” he recalls thinking. “They are stealing from this poor student.” The incident set him on a new path. Incensed at being ripped off, he set out to understand the extent of fraud and deception in the art world. “If you go to a museum, an auction house, an art dealer,” he says, “the chances are big that you are being fooled.” He reckons 30% of all items on the market are fake. Reading up on the subject, Mr Brand came across an article about Michel van Rijn, a former art smuggler turned police informant, who ran a website exposing the dark underside of the industry. Intrigued, Mr Brand got in touch with Mr van Rijn and soon became his apprentice. The pair worked together as private detectives, not only exposing forgeries but also publishing information on dodgy dealers and illicit exchanges. (When artworks are purloined they go “underground”, and are often used as collateral in drug or arms deals, rarely remaining in the possession of the thief.) They were able to track down the Gospel of Judas, a manuscript from 280AD that chronicles conversations between Jesus Christ and Judas Iscariot, as well as stolen mosaics and pre-Columbian art. Mr van Rijn introduced Mr Brand to both his criminal contacts and his associates in the Metropolitan Police in London and other forces. “I saw it all,” Mr Brand remembers. “Spies, looters, forgers, the mafia, guns.” He smiles. “Ah, what a time.” In 2011 he struck out on his own, founding Artiaz, a research firm and consultancy specialising in art and antiquities. The company’s main lines of business are establishing the authenticity and provenance of pieces on behalf of clients, and repatriating works looted by the Nazis to Jewish families. But it is a third strand—finding lost or pilfered artefacts—that has earned Mr Brand the nickname “the Indiana Jones of the art world”. Pursuing a tip from Mr van Rijn, in 2015 he recovered two equine sculptures by Josef Thorak, long presumed destroyed, which once stood outside Adolf Hitler’s office in the Reich Chancellery. In February Mr Brand published “Hitler’s Horses”, a book about the investigation; the tale involves Russian soldiers, Stasi agents and modern neo-Nazis. In recent years he has helped retrieve a ring that belonged to Oscar Wilde and Pablo Picasso’s “Buste de Femme”, a painting stolen from a yacht in 1999 (pictured with Mr Brand, above). He estimates the total value of the items he has found at more than $300m. “They say Indiana Jones, but it’s really Inspector Clouseau,” Mr Brand jokes, referring to the hapless detective in the “Pink Panther” stories. No special skill is required to be an art investigator, he insists, just patience, tenacity and a willingness to follow every lead. The epigraph to “Hitler’s Horses”, by Dick Ellis, a former head of the art and antiques squad at Scotland Yard, reads: “Arthur is an idiot, but a clever one.” Mr van Rijn suggests that Mr Brand deliberately depicts himself as an affable halfwit: “he makes a very innocent impression” so that “people underestimate him”. Whatever his tactics, Mr Brand’s work draws attention to a widespread problem—the illicit trafficking of cultural artefacts. In his book he suggests that this is the world’s fourth-most-lucrative criminal enterprise, after drugs, money-laundering and arms, with a turnover of roughly $8.3bn a year. Many objects are stolen from museums or private homes and sold on the black market; some are put up for auction. Islamic State used the profits from its plundering of Syria to fund its terrorism. For all that, it is an illegal enterprise that is not taken particularly seriously, says Corrado Catesi, head of Interpol’s programme on cultural-heritage crimes. He oversees the Stolen Works Of Art Database, a public record that contains details of 52,000 missing items from 134 countries. Many places do not have police units specialising in art crimes and do not maintain national databases of stolen art (on which Interpol’s system relies). Customs officers often lack the right training. In May Interpol launched ID-Art, a mobile app that allows users to search its index using photographs or keywords. Mr Catesi hopes it will encourage buyers to conduct due diligence before concluding deals. Private-sector operators like Mr Brand play an important role—free as they are to look into thefts that local police may not have the resources to pursue (though he emphasises that he always liaises with the relevant authorities). Mr Ellis, who retired from the police in 1999 and set up his own investigations business, collaborated with Mr Brand on the “Buste de Femme” case, among others. “If it wasn’t for people like Arthur, that picture would not have been recovered,” Mr Ellis says. “When I contacted the French police, their file was closed”; the robbery “was long past its statute of limitations”. Sleuths like them can offer guarantees to sources that the police can’t match: they have no powers of arrest and seek only to recover the artwork from whichever kingpin has it. Mr Brand took delivery of “Buste de Femme”, wrapped in bin bags, at his flat in Amsterdam. It hung on his wall for a night before being collected by an insurance company. It is risky work that Mr Brand says is often unremunerated. The pay-off, he maintains, is emotional. The people behind forgeries or the illicit trafficking of art are “messing up history”. He says he often worries that “a nurse or a doctor or a teacher, they do real jobs, you know, they really help other people”. By contrast, “what is the thing that I give to the world?” His comfort, he says, is to tell himself: “You give [people] great stories, you give them—sometimes—art back, which would not have been back without you.” ■