IT SEEMS ASTONISHING now to think there was a time when bands would change their names to something deliberately and unequivocally distasteful. In 1978 a group from Manchester called Warsaw, who had recently recorded their first EP, decided a new identity was necessary (partly to avoid being confused with another group called Warsaw Pakt). They adopted a name taken from “House of Dolls”, a novella published in 1953 by Yehiel De-Nur, a Polish writer. The new name was beautiful in itself, but ugly in context: the term is used in the book to describe Jewish women in concentration camps, kept for the sexual pleasure of their Nazi captors. And so Joy Division were born. In recent years there has been a flurry of name changes by musicians either fearing or responding to accusations of political insensitivity. Recently it was the turn of Sea Power, an acclaimed indie band who until August 9th were called British Sea Power. “There’s been a rise in a certain kind of nationalism in this world—an isolationist, antagonistic nationalism that we don’t want to run any risk of being confused with,” the group explained. “It’s become apparent that it’s possible to misapprehend the name British Sea Power, particularly if someone isn’t familiar with the band or their recordings.” When Sea Power began producing music in the early 2000s, British Sea Power simply seemed an arch name—one that resonated with those old enough to have grown up in the days when weekend afternoons meant war films on television, but young enough to understand that the notion of Britain ruling the waves was outdated. The recent rise of ethno-nationalism across America and Europe, however, made it seem a little too literal. Sea Power’s decision was all their own—no one pressured them into it. Which was not the case in 2015 when Viet Cong, a Canadian rock band, rebranded as Preoccupations after a show of theirs was cancelled following protests over their name. (The term refers to the communist guerrilla force in the Vietnam war; it has often been used pejoratively.) “When we named ourselves, we were naive about the history of a war in a country we knew very little about,” they said. “We now better understand the weight behind the words Viet Cong.” In 2020, in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement, two American country groups rechristened themselves, not because there was an outcry online, but because it seemed the right thing to do. The Dixie Chicks (pictured) lost the “Dixie” for its association with the Confederacy (angering some of their more conservative fans); Lady Antebellum contracted to Lady A to remove the reference to the period before the civil war. In a perfect demonstration of the law of unintended consequences, however, it turned out Lady A was also the name of a black blues singer, who was furious. “They’re using the name because of a Black Lives Matter incident that, for them, is just a moment in time,” the original Lady A (whose real name is Anita White) told Rolling Stone. “If it mattered, it would have mattered to them before. It shouldn’t have taken George Floyd to die for them to realise that their name had a slave reference to it.” The reckoning has extended across genres. In dance music, Joey Negro, a white British man, reverted to his given name of Dave Lee, while The Black Madonna, a white American woman, became The Blessed Madonna after online petitions accused the DJ of cultural appropriation. “We’re living in extraordinary times and this is a very small part of a much bigger conversation, but we all have a responsibility to try and affect positive change in any way we can,” she said. “I want you to be able to feel confident in the person I am and what I stand for.” Twenty years ago Viet Cong would probably have got away with it. But the digital age makes it easy both to discover bands from across the world and to quickly express disapprobation of them; ironic band names (in the case of British Sea Power) can be misinterpreted and overtly inappropriate ones (in the case of Joey Negro) will be seized on. In that and other cases, youngsters on Twitter are raising legitimate and important questions of taste and respect. If a band nowadays, no matter how great, took their name from the rape of women in concentration camps, the internet would rightly be merciless.