“THE SPARKS BROTHERS”, a new documentary film by Edgar Wright, a British director, is every bit as entertaining as the cult American pop group that is its subject. None of the clips in the montages of Sparks performances could be mistaken for any other moment in their five-decade career, nor for any other band. John Peel, a disc jockey, once said of his favourite group, The Fall, that they were “always different, always the same”. This is equally true of Sparks, perhaps the one band whose combination of idiosyncratic single-mindedness, indefatigability, cussedness and astonishing breadth of influence rivals that of the late Mark E. Smith’s outfit. But although much imitated, Sparks are unique. Mr Wright made his name as a director of action comedy, and “The Sparks Brothers” certainly fits that bill. Both hectic and hilarious, it provides a long-overdue history of the band, from their early days performing as Halfnelson and protégés of Todd Rundgren, a producer who rightly saw in them a “latent outsider genius”. Then came a move to Britain, where they became hitmakers in the mid-1970s and prefigured the baroque flourishes of Queen and Kate Bush (their quasi-operatic signature tune, “This Town Ain't Big Enough for Both of Us”, preceded Queen’s “Bohemian Rhapsody” in the upper reaches of the singles charts by 18 months, and Ms Bush’s “Wuthering Heights” by almost four years.) They had a profound impact on the more theatrical of the punks-to-be, notably Siouxsie Sioux, and weathered the first of many blows from the industry that would have finished a lesser, and less determined, act. They returned in the late 1970s as a successful electro-dance-pop duo, a prototype for numerous chart-topping acts of the 1980s. From there onwards they beat an independent path through the music business, seldom following any guide other than their own instincts. The film reveals little that is personal about Ron and Russell Mael—the brothers who have been the heart of the band. It mentions that both Maels are heterosexual, which is notable only in that they have long gloried in high camp. They describe how their imaginations were nourished by the movies, a prism through which they have always seen the world, and their minds and bodies fortified by sport. “Stamina,” says Russell Mael, “is a huge thing when having a lengthy career like we have. Maybe it comes from the same place as having the physical and mental stamina of athletics.” The early death of their father had a profound effect on their worldview. But of their existence outside the studio, stage or film set, the viewer still knows nothing. This is no accident: “Early in our conversations, we discussed with [Mr Wright] the need to keep a certain mystique about the band intact. Since our lives are pretty much wrapped around being in Sparks, it isn’t a great distortion of the reality.” Whereas another group might treat a film such as Mr Wright’s as a full stop, a way to acknowledge that their glory days are behind them, such an idea is unimaginable for Sparks. One recent collaborator, Alex Kapranos of Franz Ferdinand, a Scottish indie-rock group, sums it up when he says they have never become their own tribute band. Indeed, this year Sparks have again burst through into the public consciousness with the release not only of “The Sparks Brothers” but also of “Annette”, a characteristically rich and strange film musical for which they provided both the screenplay and the score. This is normal for the Maels. They often vanish for periods but remain active, working whether they are noticed or not, before resurfacing when the world seems ready to re-embrace them. In 2013 they released a double-CD anthology with the title “New Music For Amnesiacs”, a wry nod to the way that they are discovered by one generation after another, each seeming to think it is the first. It might seem odd to refer to Sparks as single-minded when there are two of them, but artistically they have long since fused into one entity. A motif that recurs in their accompanying artwork and music videos is that of singer Russell Mael as a puppet in the hands of Ron Mael, the songwriter. This is a typical in-joke, playing on external perceptions of the band. Russell Mael says: “Ron’s songwriting and my singing are something that can’t be detached from each other. They are inseparable. Ron doesn’t write with me in mind, yet he knows that my singing will always work with whatever he chooses to write.” This motif is carried into “Annette”, in which the title character—a little girl—is portrayed through most of the film by a series of puppets (Ron Mael credits the idea to the director, Leos Carax). Annette is the product of a union between a lowbrow stand-up comic and a celebrated opera singer—making her, like Sparks themselves, a fusion of two different cultural worlds traditionally separated by snobbery. “While I try to avoid terms like ‘high’ and ‘low’ culture, I would agree that Sparks are attempting to be both a ‘mere’ pop band and also to have some artistic aspirations,” Ron Mael says. “I feel there are Sparks songs that are somehow both commenting on a song while at the same time being the song. In a sense, this is breaking down the fourth wall of hiding behind the traditional song form and speaking past the song to the listener. The device of speaking directly to the listener is,” he notes, “as old as Shakespeare’s asides and probably much older than that. Still, we try to balance those moments with many more moments of utter sincerity and I believe the same is true in ‘Annette’.” As much as anything, this is the key to Sparks, and to their longevity. They are often arch, knowing and disposed to sharing in-jokes with their audience; but at its core their music comes from the heart and has always had heart of its own. “The Sparks Brothers” and “Annette” are available to stream via Amazon Prime Video in America. “Annette” will be available to watch in cinemas and via MUBI in Britain from September 3rd