WHEN HUNTER S. THOMPSON left Los Angeles for Las Vegas in 1971, in the company of Oscar Acosta, a Mexican-American lawyer and Chicano activist, he did not mean to write a cult novel. Thompson was working on a piece about Ruben Salazar, a Mexican-American journalist killed the previous year by a tear-gas canister fired by police during a march against the Vietnam war. Acosta, his main source, was worried about being seen with a white writer—but agreed to go with Thompson to Las Vegas, where he was due to produce the captions for a series of photographs of the Mint 400 off-road desert race. The roman à clef that arose from the trip, published in two parts in Rolling Stone that autumn, was an elusive blend of fact and fiction, observation and exaggeration. “Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas: A Savage Journey to the Heart of the American Dream” turns 50 this year. Its vitriol has lost none of its satirical bite. The story begins with Raoul Duke—the pseudonym that Thompson, who died in 2005, assigned himself as the deeply unreliable narrator—and Dr Gonzo, his lawyer, hallucinating on the highway as they speed towards Las Vegas. Driving a rented Chevy convertible that they call the Great Red Shark, they are armed with “two bags of grass, 75 pellets of mescaline, five sheets of high-powered blotter acid, a salt shaker half full of cocaine and a whole galaxy of multicoloured uppers, downers, screamers, laughers”; also “a quart of tequila, a quart of rum, a case of Budweiser, a pint of raw ether and two dozen amyls”. On the surface, the novel is about the consumption of this arsenal of mind-altering substances and the visions and paranoia, vomiting and violence that ensue. The duo attend the Mint 400 but soon embark on a two-day bender amid the glitzy decadence of Vegas casinos, destroying their hotel room and running up a huge bill they have no intention of paying. They flee the city before the damage is discovered, but return almost immediately to cover the National District Attorneys’ Conference on Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Grasping that the many cops in attendance don’t have a clue what they are talking about, they again abandon their assignment and spend a few days in the grip of “amphetamine psychosis”, trawling late-night diners and taco stands in search of the American dream, “burning the locals, abusing the tourists, terrifying the help”. Reviews were mixed when the novel appeared as a single volume in 1972 (“more hype than book”, sniffed the New Republic). But it subsequently achieved cult status, boosted by a film adaptation in 1998. Its appeal rests less on the depraved antics of the main characters than on their encounters with other people, and its bleakly humorous dissection of the American psyche. Thompson uses Vegas, a city “so grossly atavistic that a really massive crime often slips by unrecognised”, as a symbol of a country in the midst of political and ideological change. The counterculture of the 1960s is in its death throes; with Richard Nixon in the White House, America is sliding towards something darker and meaner. Most of the cameos are as repellent as the narrator—cruel, ignorant, greedy, prejudiced and occasionally violent. Illustrations by Ralph Steadman, a British artist, depict them as twisted and deformed, more animal than human. Half a century on, Thompson’s themes of capitalism and greed, racial tension and the inadequacies of traditional journalism still resonate. Nixon is long gone but in the bumpy wake of Donald Trump’s presidency—a period of government-led anti-immigrant and anti-media sentiment, Black Lives Matter protests triggered by police brutality, white-supremacist riots and the shadow of impeachment—Thompson’s “gross, physical salute to the fantastic possibilities of life in this country” feels unsettlingly contemporary. To protect the identity of Acosta (who was to disappear in Mexico in 1974), he is characterised as a 300-pound Samoan. But, at a time when Thompson was reporting on Mexican-American activism—and what he deemed an attempted cover-up of Salazar’s murder—the narrator repeatedly draws attention to Dr Gonzo’s race. “You Samoans are all the same…You have no faith in the essential decency of the white man’s culture,” he opines, before telling a terrified hitchhiker they pick up in the desert that “in spite of his race, this man is extremely valuable to me”. At the narcotics conference, a disturbance in the crowd is presumed to be “a racial conflict of some kind, something that couldn’t be helped”. Besides race, the novel’s main preoccupation is the failure of journalism in an era when the president openly loathed the press. “Objective journalism is one of the main reasons American politics has been allowed to be so corrupt for so long. You can’t be objective about Nixon,” Thompson once told the Atlantic. In his most paranoid and introspective moments, the narrator of “Fear and Loathing” turns to news stories so grim that they render his own sins “pale and meaningless” in comparison. He reads about the police attacking anti-war demonstrators, torture by the armed forces, mass murder and drug deaths; he watches “Pentagon generals babbling insane lies” on television. Every depredation is reported without context, every suggestion of responsibility rebuffed by officials with a mantra of “No comment”. Even the sensational is heart-sinkingly superficial. Towards the end, the narrator spells out his disillusionment. “Why bother with newspapers, if this is all they offer?” he rages. “Journalism is not a profession or a trade. It is a cheap catch-all for fuckoffs and misfits.” Thompson claimed that “gonzo” journalism—a personal, scabrous, avowedly subjective style which he pioneered—was inspired by William Faulkner’s view that “the best fiction is far more true than any kind of journalism”. Fifty years after its publication, and despite its many distortions, “Fear and Loathing” retains its own twisted kind of truth. ■