Untraceable. By Sergei Lebedev. Translated by Antonina Bouis. New Vessel Press; 242 pages; $22.95. Apollo; £18.99 TWO RUSSIAN agents board a plane to the West under assumed identities. Hidden among the toiletries in their hand luggage is a deadly poison, developed in the Soviet Union and now used to eliminate enemies of the modern Russian state. Their mission does not go quite as planned. The basic elements of “Untraceable”, published in Russian last year and now translated vividly into English by Antonina Bouis, will be familiar to anyone who followed the botched poisoning of Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia in Salisbury in 2018. That stranger-than-fiction news story has already inspired a television drama; a “Novichok novel” may have been inevitable, especially in the wake of the attack last August on Alexei Navalny, the Russian opposition leader, which also involved a nerve agent from the same family. But Sergei Lebedev’s story transcends its factual source material. On the surface, “Untraceable”is a taut spy thriller with Gothic flourishes. In the present day, Russia sends two agents to Germany to hunt down Kalitin, the self-exiled, Frankenstein-like progenitor of a substance called Neophyte, in a bid to stop him revealing its lethal secrets to the West. As they prepare to dispatch the scientist with his own invention, flashbacks reveal how Kalitin developed the chemical weapon in a laboratory in a mysterious far-eastern settlement known as “the Island”. Woven into the cloak-and-dagger chase is a complex tale of memory. Failed relationships, missions and regimes haunt the novel’s characters as they do John le Carré’s. Neophyte—an obvious stand-in for Novichok, which means “beginner” in Russian—may kill without a trace, but everything else leaves a mark. Decades after he fled the Soviet Union, Kalitin finds that “memory—unwanted, rejected—had come to exact a penalty for its long incarceration”. Through the scientist and the spooks sent to kill him, “Untraceable” explores the Soviet legacy, the toll of more recent depredations in the north Caucasus (where one of the agents has witnessed and committed atrocities), and contemporary Russia’s unwillingness to reckon with its past. These are themes that Mr Lebedev, a former geologist and journalist who now lives in Berlin, has examined in his previous novels, all of which have been translated into English. For instance, “Oblivion” (2011) dealt penetratingly with repressed memories of the gulag. New readers will be attracted by the topical scenario in “Untraceable”, then find that it offers not only a compelling reworking of real-life events, but an insight into the psychological effects of poisoning, literal and metaphorical, in Russia and beyond. For his part, looking back on his life’s work, Kalitin “liked the simple yet paradoxical idea that the best poison is fear. The best poisoning is when people poison themselves.”