TO SHOW HOW her husband would hit her, Ana (not her real name) makes a fist with her slender fingers and swings. He began soon after their marriage when she was 16: he was bullied at work but brutish at home. One night he drunkenly told Ana to leave their house in León, Nicaragua’s second city. When she tried to, he put his machete against her neck while she clutched their baby daughter. Five years ago the beatings abated. Threats to call the police quietened him, says Ana. He may not respect her, but he respects the authorities. Now 53, Ana may never leave the relationship. But her bravery in managing it, and discussing it in a café over hibiscus tea, attests to surprising changes that have come to Nicaragua. In 1995 and again in 2016, foreign researchers asked women in León if they had suffered physical violence from their partner in the past year. In 1995 some 28% said yes. In 2016 just 8% did. The number who said they had never been beaten by a partner rose from 45% to 72%. Surveys over the same period show a similar shift across the country. Such population-wide success stories are rare. Mary Ellsberg, who conducted both studies, reckons only America, after the passage in 1994 of the Violence Against Women Act, can boast of such a steep drop in domestic violence over so short a period. America’s government spent billions to achieve that. Nicaragua, the second-poorest country in the Americas, did it on the cheap. Its example suggests how other cash-strapped countries can tackle the scourge. The revolution of 1979, led by Daniel Ortega, bequeathed to Nicaragua a strong women’s movement. The presidents who followed Mr Ortega after his ousting in 1990 were hardly feminist, but they let women’s groups organise and listened to them. Their efforts helped pass laws which made domestic violence a crime, and prompted various governments to issue five-year plans with policies to curb it. Shelters proliferated across the country, as did women’s police stations with counsellors, medics and privacy. Women also toiled to change attitudes. Campaigners knocked on doors and went into classrooms. An NGO helped launch “Sexto Sentido” (“Sixth Sense”), a slick telenovela full of messages about domestic violence, safe sex and other taboos. It helped women understand their rights and their worth, says Johana Ocon, an activist in Malpaisillo, a town outside León. She describes women’s private chats as hormigas (“ants”): one will achieve little, but thousands will create a support network to help women avoid and flee violence. Progress faltered after Mr Ortega returned to power in 2007. He distrusts women’s groups, perhaps because they believed his stepdaughter, Zoilamérica, when she accused him in 1998 of sexually abusing her as a child. His government has abolished women’s police stations and halved the number of shelters. Foreign donations dried up as Mr Ortega turned Nicaragua into a dictatorship. Ms Ocon has been unable to visit schools for half a decade. Domestic violence seems to be worsening with the pandemic. That does not mean the recent advances will be reversed. Ana sees a new generation, with strength and self-esteem that cannot easily be taken away. Her daughter, now 30 years old, has never been beaten.