Editor’s note (March 20th 2021): President Tayyip Recep Erdogan today dismissed Naci Agbal, his third central-bank governor in under two years. This article from the print edition published on March 18th foreshadowed Mr Agbal’s downfall. His successor, Sahap Kavcioglu, a former banker and ex-lawmaker, opposes high interest rates—as does Mr Erdogan. NACI AGBAL deserves a pat on the back. In only a few months as Turkey’s central-bank governor, he has breathed new life into his country’s currency, bolstered the bank’s reputation and started to replenish its coffers. The lira had a terrible 2020, losing nearly 20% of its dollar value. Among emerging-market currencies, only the Argentine peso and the Brazilian real fared worse. This year it was by far the strongest of the bunch until late February, when a spike in US treasury yields, a possible harbinger of higher borrowing costs in America, prompted a sell-off of Turkish assets. Mr Agbal has come up with the right remedy. When he took over last November, the former finance minister inherited a currency crisis and a central bank that had wasted an estimated $130bn of its foreign reserves in a hare-brained defence of the lira. Since then he has raised interest rates by a cumulative 675 points, pledged to rebuild the bank’s reserves, and improved communication with financial markets in Turkey and abroad. “He adopted a more predictable and transparent framework, which helped him manage expectations,” says Hakan Kara, the bank’s former chief economist. “The central bank has done a tremendous job restoring some of its credibility,” says Piotr Matys of Rabobank, a Dutch financial-services giant. But things are not about to get easier for Mr Agbal. The credit bonanza that helped Turkey cope with the pandemic (the economy grew by 1.8% in 2020, defying most forecasts) also put pressure on the lira and on prices. Inflation in Turkey has been creeping up for over a year. In February it reached 15.6%. Another interest-rate rise may now be on the cards. On March 18th, as The Economist went to press, the bank was expected to increase the benchmark rate by a percentage point. Mr Agbal says he will keep policy tight to smother inflation, which he wants to bring down to 5% in under three years. But there is no telling whether he can stay the course, or even remain at his post. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who promised to give Mr Agbal a free hand when he took up his post, seems so far to have lived up to his word. But the governor continues to serve at the president’s mercy. Turkey does not have to hold a general election until 2023. But there are rumours of a possible snap vote. The louder these grow, the more pressure Mr Agbal will face to trade monetary discipline for economic growth. Mr Erdogan has already signalled his unease with the recent rate rises. Turkey’s president sacked two of Mr Agbal’s predecessors in less than two years. If his political future is at stake, he may not hesitate to ditch a third. Just as worrying is the spectre of Berat Albayrak, who succeeded Mr Agbal as finance minister in 2018 and who resigned in a huff when his rival got the central-bank job. Mr Albayrak, who is married to one of Mr Erdogan’s daughters, and who was once believed to be the second most powerful person in Turkey, has not made a single public appearance since his exit. But he may be plotting a comeback. A recent sign came in late February, when Mr Erdogan publicly defended his son-in-law’s record and the decision to use up so much of the central bank’s foreign reserves during his tenure. Markets saw this as a sign that Mr Albayrak may be returning to politics. The lira suffered a mild heart attack and fell by 2% in a day. Mr Agbal may have missed a chance by not raising rates since December. With the lira rattled again, this time by the news from America, he may now have to do it anyway. And Mr Erdogan’s patience could soon start to wear thin. ■