I N 2017, ANY voters who wanted to follow Britain out of the EU had options. In the run-up to elections that spring, Geert Wilders, a bizarrely coiffured advocate of “Nexit”, was level at the top of polls in the Netherlands. A few months later Marine Le Pen reached the second round of the French presidential election on a policy of taking the country out of the euro and the EU itself. In Italy, Matteo Salvini, the leader of the Northern League, attacked Mario Draghi, then the boss of Europe’s central bank, as an “accomplice” to the “massacre” of Italy’s economy. The party dangled the prospect of Italy’s departure from the euro and even the EU itself. Skip forward four years and the picture is different. Ahead of Dutch elections next week, there has been so little discussion of the EU that academics there have started begging politicians to pay some attention to the “EU olifant [elephant]” in the room. After flopping last time, Mr Wilders is now bashing Islam rather than Brussels. It will do him little good. Polls give a large lead to the party of Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, who has learned to stop worrying and (almost, but not quite) love the EU. After a comprehensive defeat at the hands of Emmanuel Macron in 2017, Ms Le Pen and advisers have dropped their calls for Frexit and abandoning the euro ahead of elections next year. In Italy, Mr Salvini now supports a technocratic government run by Mr Draghi, his former nemesis, who is now prime minister. “I am a very pragmatic person,” said Mr Salvini, when discussing the shift. Euroscepticism in its hardest form has gone out of fashion for a few reasons. Brexit torpedoed the idea of an easy departure. Anyway, leaving the EU was never a particularly popular idea outside Britain. Continental surveys such as Eurobarometer can generate Panglossian results, but they all point to big majorities supporting EU membership in almost every country. In both France and the Netherlands 69% would vote to stay, while only 31% would back leaving, according to eupinions, a pollster. Attracting these would-be quitters is a reasonable strategy in the Netherlands, where politics is so fragmented that anything over 10% is a good result. But it is a weak foundation to rely on for those hoping to win more than half the vote, such as Ms Le Pen. Even in countries where leaving is ostensibly popular, the idea of ever actually doing it is beyond the pale. Italian voters are among the most fed up when it comes to the EU. During the nadir of the covid-19 crisis last year, nearly half of Italians said they would vote to leave the bloc, given the choice. At the same time, the main complaint about the EU is that there is not enough of it: Italians are among the biggest advocates of deeper integration, demanding everything from common debt to sharing out the asylum-seekers who turn up on Italian beaches. When it comes to the EU, Italian voters resemble Woody Allen’s joke about two people moaning in a restaurant: the food here is terrible, and such small portions. Over the past year, however, the portions have increased. As part of the EU’s €750bn recovery fund, Italy will receive around €200bn in grants and loans, paid for with common EU debt. Mr Salvini’s change in tune comes after a change in circumstances. Equivocal Eurosceptics like Mr Salvini increasingly make a different calculation: why try to smash the EU when you can help reshape it? The Northern League and Ms Le Pen’s National Rally have shifted from pariahs to potential parties of government, says Duncan McDonnell of Griffith University. Mr Salvini has a shot at becoming prime minister, polls suggest. A Le Pen presidency is also possible, if still improbable. But the chance of a seat at the table is there. “It would be ridiculous to leave,” said Philippe Olivier, one of Ms Le Pen’s advisers (who is also her brother-in-law), when summing up the French politician’s shift in strategy. This strategy has worked well in Poland and Hungary, whose governments enthusiastically attack the EU yet have no intention of quitting. After all, the EU is a tool. Changing who wields it changes what it does. The politics of austerity dominated the past decade because the centre-right politicians who controlled its levers of powers wanted it. Tight rules on spending were agreed by European leaders and can be dismissed in the same way. Leaders such as Mr Rutte tend to grow more comfortable with the EU once they learn how much control they have. National governments run the show. There is no constitutional reason for the EU to shift towards the liberalism that so offends its Eurosceptic critics. Its treaties were not passed down on tablets of stone. If all governments agree, they can be changed, as indeed they may soon be if a planned Conference on the Future of Europe set to run until 2022 proves to be more than a talking-shop. In any case, political orders trump whatever institutional biases may exist. Before the migration crisis of 2015, officials in the European Commission had a humanitarian bent on the topic, lecturing governments about the perils of building fences as people wandered across borders. But when a bunch of hard-nosed immigration ministers demanded a far tougher policy from the EU, they got what they wanted. Yet Euroscepticism is dormant rather than dead. Politics is a results business, and increasingly those results are dictated by the EU. By taking on the responsibility for supplying vaccines, the commission also agreed to take the blame if things went wrong. If EU citizens find themselves still confined to their homes while Americans and Israelis hit the beach, Europe’s band of Eurosceptics may stir anew. Likewise, if the EU’s underpowered fiscal stimulus results in European economies falling further behind America, as seems likely, then the likes of Ms Le Pen and Mr Salvini will be first in the queue to try to exploit the anger. The EU is responsible, for the first time, for people’s health and more than ever for their wealth. Get either wrong, never mind both, and voters will not be forgiving. ■