In spring thoughts traditionally turn to travelling, and so to maps. This was always something of a ritual in our house. Out of the bottom desk-drawer they’d come: the shiny Ordnance Surveys, the dog-eared city guides, the family treasures backed with canvas or patched with tape. Into the glove-compartment some would go, among the pens and receipts and whitening chocolate bars. We were halfway there already. Last year’s road map, already in a tattered state, would be thrown on the back seat. We had much less affection for that. Like the pale, flat Google Maps now on our phones, or the relentless black curve of the SatNav, this was a dull thing. For some reason, I’ve kept the one we bought in 2008. Though the cover shouts “Fully Updated! Now with Fixed Speed Camera Locations!” (the faintly illegal reason we bought it), it mostly proclaims its unexciting origins: it was on special offer at Delamere service station, together with two lattes and a Filet O’Fish. And it is this drab object that springs to mind each time I hear of that other “road map”, the one that is going to lead us out of lockdown. Maps are fascinating, but road maps are a different breed. They are purely functional, with no distractions. And they have always been that way. I came across an antique version once, stuck on the inside board of a book: it ran straight as a ruler up and down, with towns named on either side, and the mileage. There was nothing more. It gave no indication of anything worth doing or seeing, any more than a compass would. The destination was everything. Getting there was a route-march. Something deep in me resists this. As a child, I travelled in a car where distracting maps were the order of the day. We had a camper-van, and to find a suitable pitch for our tent we had to know each nook and byway of the route. The front-seat passenger sat with a lapful of Ordnance Survey inch-to-the-mile maps, which had to be deployed with the same speed and skill as changing old records on a gramophone. Folding and unfolding them without covering the windscreen was a fine art in itself. I once guided my parents from London to Scotland, the maps round my feet as well as on my lap. I can still see those red strips of A-road neatly bisecting each map, in an annoyingly brief way. It was off the road where life buzzed: inns, orchards, churches with towers, marshes, windmills, woods. Now if I were to take that footpath, climb to that Iron Age fort… Road maps, though, invite no detours. The roads themselves may twist and tangle, but even in the Scottish Highlands the world is white, flat and plain. This is a place where asphalt rules, so that railway stations are unimportant dots. Cities full of fascination become blots, with wide berths round them. Only service stations shine out, like blue jewels on a string. The road map promises order and smoothness, roundabouts that are a doddle, obvious exits, a flow of traffic easy and regular as the circulation of the blood. Even with a road-map app, sudden bumps appear from nowhere. There will be that landslip, that tailback, that lorry shedding its load. Such is travel. There will always be the overhead sign that appeared in a wonderful New Yorker cartoon: “Now what? ¾ mile”. Old maps assume that travel will be difficult, but they give it interest. The roads that meander through 17th-century county maps pass small pyramidal hills, copses, settlements and steeples, which look worth a visit. On medieval maps what seem to be roads may actually be rivers, snaking to alarming dead ends – you’ll be well-mired and stranded whichever way you go. Yet here is a building with turrets and vanes, there a train of laden camels, over there a Great Khan with turban and beard sitting, in a welcoming way, under a striped pavilion. And out in the sea great whales are surfacing and blowing. Modern 1:25,000 maps have much the same allure. I keep my nose in them even when I no longer need them, tracking each channel and pit, rehearsing the names of ridges, plotting visits to that building in the middle of nowhere or to find out why “Scabs Island” is so-called. The main road that runs through them is not useless: it carries the buses I need to get home. But in my imagination I am busy adding features to my own map: here a bluebell wood, there the place my shoe broke, there the peregrine sighting, there the spot where we found a musket ball. As official road maps are unrolled, I’m sure that inside many minds now, similar counter-maps are forming. The government’s recommended route runs straight ahead, marked by a few large overhead signs. From this we are not to deviate. But our mental maps wriggle off all over the place. Here we see foaming pints in a pub garden, and over there a pair of sun-drenched deckchairs on a beach. To the east is an aircraft taxi-ing in, and to the west a crowd in a shopping street, and farther on a great big family party where, under a striped pavilion, we finally hug each other.■ Ann Wroe is The Economist’s obituaries editor ILLUSTRATIONS: ANTONELLO SILVERINI