THE WORLD is split into three types of covid-19 countries. The first consists of those with lots of recent cases countered by vigorous vaccination campaigns: America and Britain, for example. The second includes the likes of Australia, Japan and China, with few vaccines but few cases to worry about. The last is made up of places with lots of new cases but little vaccination. Continental Europe is the only big, rich region in that unfortunate ward. (Much of Latin America is in a similar spot, and data are patchy in many poor countries.) It is an unexpected outcome for a continent that thought it had managed the first phase of the pandemic rather well. About a quarter of all cases and deaths from covid-19 since the start of the year have been in EU countries, whose citizens make up just 6% of the global population, according to Our World in Data, which collates national statistics. A spate of infections that started six months ago has proved stubbornly enduring—more of a swell than a wave. This week Italy became the sixth (and smallest) country to record over 100,000 deaths. Resurgent covid prompted other countries, such as Israel and Britain, to turbocharge their vaccination programmes. But the European Commission fumbled the ordering of doses for the bloc last summer, and has secured few early jabs. Worse, in some countries many of the vaccines delivered are lying unused in fridges and freezers—the fault of national authorities. As a result, just ten doses for every 100 Europeans have been administered, against 28 in America and 35 in Britain.  Paired with a surge in “variant” cases that are more infectious—and now dominate from Poland to Portugal—the upshot is a pandemic that is likely to endure for months to come. The impact will be felt beyond hospital wards, which are filling up in some countries: health authorities in Paris are cutting non-covid procedures by 40% to help manage rising cases. One impact will be on the economy. On March 9th the OECD, a policy-advisory shop, downgraded growth prospects in Italy and France even as it upgraded America’s. In view of low vaccination rates, its chief economist warned that it is too soon to think about more fiscal stimulus in Europe. Across much of the EU, swathes of the economy look likely to remain throttled—and state-supported—for months. Politically, leaders are having to balance the need for lockdowns with perceived public fatigue. Italy is considering new confinement measures. France has stuck to a curfew, and kept schools open, even as scientific advisers warn that variant strains could soon send cases spiking. Germany loosened restrictions just as cases were rising, putting its faith in more vaccinations and tests. The sense of a coherent plan being in place there was not helped when two MPs resigned as it emerged that last spring they had moonlighted as brokers of masks and other protective equipment. Spain is faring better, but others, such as Estonia, are facing acute spikes. Unity among the EU’s members is being tested. A year ago national borders that had supposedly been abolished sprang up again, and governments beggared their neighbours out of whatever masks and other equipment they could snatch before they could be exported. A pan-European recovery programme funded by joint borrowing and the centralised procurement of vaccines was supposed to be a symbol of renewed unity. That sentiment looks frailer than ever. National borders have started to reappear, erected by the likes of Germany and Belgium to isolate pestilent neighbours. Vaccine nationalism has made an appearance, blocking shipments out of the bloc. On March 4th Italy, under the new leadership of Mario Draghi, was the first to make use of an EU export-control mechanism agreed in January after AstraZeneca, a drug firm, abruptly pushed back deliveries to later in the year. So 250,000 doses of its vaccine will stay in Europe instead. The biggest challenge, and source of much political tension, is the dearth of vaccines. National governments are quietly fuming at the commission for its procurement blunder, while Brussels blames the pharmaceutical companies. Some countries are now sourcing their jabs from outside the vaunted EU framework. Hungary has started using the Sputnik V vaccine and the Chinese Sinopharm one, with which its prime minister, Viktor Orban, was pricked on February 28th. Many of its central European neighbours are tempted to follow suit, though neither vaccine has received the green light from the European Medicines Agency. An Italian lab is to start making Sputnik V. The EU is keen to show that the situation will improve soon. The European commissioner now liaising with the vaccine suppliers, Thierry Breton, has let it be known that he starts his day with a 5am call to the chief executive of AstraZeneca; other bosses get badgered later in the day. Around 100m monthly doses are expected from April onwards, double the figure for March and enough to get 70% of adult Europeans inoculated by the end of July. That still means shortages in the coming weeks. But many European countries have not helped themselves. After the AstraZeneca debacle, several national authorities barred its use on older patients, even as the EU regulator declared it safe and effective for everyone. President Emmanuel Macron of France denigrated it as “quasi-ineffective” for over-65s. Now that age restrictions are being lifted in France and Germany among others, its take-up should increase—if patients sign up. Around a quarter of people in Italy, France and Germany say they would rather wait for another vaccine. The result has been stocks of unused AstraZeneca doses. Whereas 89% of Pfizer-BioNTech doses delivered to member states have been used, the figure is under half for AstraZeneca. The procurement mess has at least meant that Europe has focused its few doses on those people who need them most urgently, notably the elderly. That should start to reduce the number of deaths, for example in care homes. National authorities are looking feverishly for signs that vaccination programmes are having such an impact, as they are in America and Britain. Until they do, Europe will remain stuck in a pandemic that others are starting to put behind them. ■ Dig deeper All our stories relating to the pandemic and the vaccines can be found on our coronavirus hub. You can also listen to  The Jab, our new podcast on the race between injections and infections, and find trackers showing the global roll-out of vaccines, excess deaths by country and the virus’s spread across Europe and America.