A HUMANITARIAN CRISIS is brewing on America’s border with Mexico. Hundreds of thousands of people, including many unaccompanied children, are hoping to gain entry to the United States. The number of illegal crossings this year may be the highest for two decades. People are attracted by yearning for a better life, pushed by misery and violence at home—and encouraged by the hope that Joe Biden’s administration will be more welcoming than Donald Trump’s. This spells political trouble for Mr Biden, caught between his own party’s progressives and wider public opinion. He may be unable to halt the surge from the south, but he can be clearer in what he says; he can crack down on illegal immigration, while being more open to the legal kind; and he can start to overhaul America’s clogged asylum system. Immigration and the covid-19 pandemic may occupy Mr Biden at home. Abroad, relations with China looked likely to be his heaviest burden long before a high-level Sino-American meeting summit began in Alaska on March 19th with both sides venting their tempers. Contrary to Western hopes, China has not become more liberal as it has got richer. Even as the Chinese Communist Party tightens its grip on Hong Kong, the territory is enjoying a financial boom. Leading companies from the Chinese mainland happily issue shares there. Western investment banks are equally eager to underwrite them—and to take advantage of the opening of China’s capital markets, which under the state’s watchful eye are shaking off their reputation as a casino. Engagement with China, given its growing heft, is the only sensible option. But engagement without appeasement demands resilience and confidence: that means buttressing Western institutions against Chinese interference and repairing the political infrastructure of globalisation. Just such a balancing act is a feature of Britain’s review of foreign and defence policies, published on March 16th. China’s rise looms over the document, which both identifies the country as a “systemic threat...to our security prosperity and values” and warns that Britain “must remain open to Chinese trade and investment”. Yet the review proposes only a modest tilt towards the Indo-Pacific (though a new aircraft-carrier will soon sail there and Britain wants to join a regional trade pact). Europe and the Atlantic remain the focus of security policy. The main surprise is a reversal of decades of cuts in Britain’s nuclear arsenal. Britain will also stop publishing the number of warheads carried on each of its nuclear submarines, the better to befuddle potential enemies. On the home front, Britain’s main adversary is covid-19. It suffered a setback this week: a squeeze on supply may slow the hitherto rapid roll-out of vaccines. In the rest of Europe, where roll-outs are already sluggish and infections are again on the rise, several countries halted distribution of the AstraZeneca/Oxford vaccine after reports of blood clots. Inoculations resumed after reassurance from medical regulators, but an abundance of caution will have cost lives. Unsteady handling of the pandemic hurt Germany’s governing Christian Democrats in state elections last weekend—but not the Dutch prime minister’s party in a national vote on Tuesday. In Israel, Binyamin Netanyahu will hope that a speedy vaccination programme will help keep him in office after this coming Tuesday’s general election. Tanzania’s president, who had declared that God would protect his country from covid-19, has died. Many believe he fell victim to the virus. In recent years optimism about African manufacturing has been in short supply. Between 1975 and 2014 the sector’s share of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP fell from 19% to 11%. Employment in manufacturing declined. Economists worried that Africa had prematurely departed from a well-worn path to prosperity. Now things are looking rosier. Since 2010 the number of workers in African factories has risen; so has output. To maintain this progress, African governments have to learn from past mistakes—and refrain from nationalising companies or cosseting would-be national champions. A continental trade agreement can help. But governments can do more: reliable infrastructure and educated workers are also essential for boosting productivity.