FROM THE government’s point of view, the timing could not have been worse. On March 9th, it published its new criminal-justice bill, which if enacted would allow police to clamp down on protests. On March 13th, hundreds of women, and a few men, gathered on Clapham Common to mourn Sarah Everard, a marketing executive, whose murder—for which a serving police officer has been charged—sparked an outpouring of anger and solidarity. The Metropolitan Police, which had declined to give the vigil organisers a permit on the grounds that it would breach lockdown rules, swooped in and arrested its organisers. Given that the vigil was no more than a peaceful expression of grief about a horrific crime, the Met’s behaviour sparked widespread criticism and demands for the resignation of Cressida Dick, the force’s commissioner. Tom Tugendhat, an influential Tory MP, tweeted that the vigil was a legitimate expression of outrage “about violence against women by free citizens in a free country” but that “the powers used against them echoed something different.” Nimco Ali, the government’s adviser on tackling violence against women and girls, says the police behaved like abusers. Priti Patel, the home secretary, has ordered a review into the vigil’s policing. But many worry that the incident is just a foretaste of what will happen if the new bill is enacted. Until lockdown, Britain was enjoying a protest renaissance. Over the past couple of years, Extinction Rebellion (XR) and Black Lives Matter (BLM) have organised massive demonstrations in London and smaller ones across the country. These movements irk the government, which is dominated by the socially conservative wing of the Tory party. Ms Patel has not hidden her distaste for these movements. At a police conference last year she branded XR “eco-crusaders turned criminals”. In February she said BLM protests were “dreadful.” Lord Walney, a former Labour MP and the government’s Special Envoy for Countering Violent Extremism, is heading a report into extremism. In an interview with the Daily Telegraph last month he said the report will in part focus on “progressive extremists” from far-left organisations like the Socialist Workers’ Party who many believe are infiltrating groups like XR and BLM. Rules designed to limit the spread of covid-19 have allowed police to crack down on protests. A nurse who organised a socially distanced protest against low pay in the NHS, for instance, was handed a £10,000 ($14,000) fine earlier this month. Critics say that the criminal-justice bill is, in effect, extending draconian restrictions on liberty which the public have accepted as the price of suppressing the pandemic into the post-pandemic era. The government has a particular interest in giving the police extra powers this year. COP26, a high-profile international climate conference, is being held in Glasgow in November. Boris Johnson will not want to be upstaged by an angry mob in front of a global audience. The bill, on which Parliament will vote on March 15th, is a rag-bag of measures designed to please social conservatives. As well as stiffening sentences for child murderers and sex offenders, it also proposes tougher laws against protests and mass gatherings by broadening the range of circumstances that allow police to block them or limit their size. At present the police can impose restrictions on protests only if they risk causing serious property damage or disruption to communities. If the bill is enacted, protests carried out by a single person may be subject to restrictions, and the noise that they produce will also be grounds for restricting them. Activists who deface war memorials and statues—which some BLM members have done—could face ten years in jail. At present prosecutors have to prove that a protester knowingly failed to comply with a condition imposed. The government claims that this opens a loophole protesters exploit by disregarding written conditions from the police and claiming ignorance. The bill wants to change this to say that the protester “knows or ought to have known” about new conditions. That means that even if the protester hasn’t been handed a condition or seen the police’s social media announcements, they can still be arrested and prosecuted for breaking the law. Many critics say this amounts to the silencing of protest. “If Priti Patel was heading up Homeland Security in the US in 1963, Martin Luther King would be whispering his ‘I Have A Dream’ speech in a parking lot outside D.C. rather than relaying it to millions in front of the Lincoln Memorial,” says Raj Chada, a lawyer who specialises in protest law. Mr Tugenhadt has not said whether he will vote for the bill, but a mass rebellion is unlikely. Labour will vote against it; a Tory MP says that although speakers will denounce the policing of the vigil for Miss Everard, they will argue in favour of the new laws. But the protest may make voters a little more aware of the importance of the liberties that the bill undermines.