Kintsugi. By Bonnie Kemske. Bloomsbury; 176 pages; $38. Herbert Press; £30 Art and Faith. By Makoto Fujimura. Yale University Press; 184 pages; $26 and £20 IN JAPAN ANTIQUE tea bowls can have an aura that surpasses mere appearance. They may connote lyrical names, famous histories, even ancient myths. Take “Seppo” (“Snowy peak”), made by the potter, designer and calligrapher Hon’ami Koetsu in the early 17th century. “Seppo” came damaged from the kiln, with deep crevices running across its reddish raku-ware surface. Koetsu repaired it using the traditional method of kintsugi, which binds flawed or smashed crockery with lacquer and covers the joins with powdered gold or silver. So this snowy peak has golden rivers cascading down its slopes; the bowl’s beautiful wounds may also commemorate the ritual suicide of Koetsu’s revered teacher. Kintsugi is in vogue in the West, with adherents ranging from cake-bakers and jewellery-makers to the designers who, in “The Rise of Skywalker” (released in 2019), gave the turncoat Jedi hero a kintsugi-marked helmet. As Bonnie Kemske puts it in her book on the method’s craft and lore, the golden jigsaw of a kintsugi-treated piece “takes an accident and transforms it into a glorious rebirth”. Enticingly, the technique not only repairs a damaged treasure but leaves it lovelier, and more valuable. The idea opens up an “intriguing world of beauty, narrative and metaphor”. As Ms Kemske explains, kintsugi “never hides the story of the object’s damage”. It mocks “invisible mending” and challenges “the stigma of repair”. Instead, flaws, chips and rifts point the way to a new wholeness that embraces old losses and breakages. Ms Kemske quotes Leonard Cohen: “There is a crack, a crack in everything/That’s how the light gets in.” Today this wrecked crockery bears a heavy load of symbolism. But kintsugi (“golden join”) had a more pragmatic beginning. Urushi, a solutionmade from the sap of the Japanese lacquer tree, was first used for pottery repair in the Jomon era, more than 3,000 years ago. The addition of gold or silver to glorify restoration arrived with the ceremonial tea culture that flourished in 16th- and 17th-century Japan. Fine tea vessels became prized status-markers—but, inevitably, the cherished bowls and pots would sometimes smash. Glittering fixes both enhanced their allure and, paradoxically, nodded to the Zen-influenced wabi-sabi aesthetic that valued things “old, worn and tinged with sadness”. The leading tea master, Furuta Oribe, decreed that “Perfect tea bowls are dull ones.” Thus kintsugi inscribed mixed messages on its striated surfaces. It told of shining magnificence, and of time-battered humility. It was virtuous and chic at once. Thoughtfully written and splendidly illustrated, Ms Kemske’s survey of the art’s history captures that duality. She sketches its technology and describes illuminating visits to practitioners in America, Britain and Japan—where, she says, kintsugi remains free of the “hyperbole” surrounding it in Western art. She salutes its therapeutic power, citing Yukiko Kuroda, a restorer: “Learning to put a pot back together helped me to put myself back together.” Makoto Fujimura frames the redemption of kintsugi as a parable of the Christian approach to creativity. “It is precisely through our brokenness and fissures that God’s grace can shine,” he writes in “Art and Faith”. Born in Boston but brought up in Japan, Mr Fujimura won acclaim as a painter in New York. For him, kintsugi unites his vocation and his faith: “We are wretched, broken fragments of what was once beautiful.” His “theology of making” places creation at the heart of belief. He takes that theology seriously. “Art and Faith” features more biblical exegesis than studio tips, as the painter wrestles eloquently with art-averse fellow-Christians who prefer narrow-minded “culture war” to the “culture care” he advocates. For him, a rich seam of imagery flows through kintsugi. Thanks to Jesus, he says, “our fissures became filled with gold”. He uses costly minerals in his painting, offsetting the frugal wabi-sabi values of age and wear with a frank delight in artistic abundance, even extravagance: “As God’s Creation is sumptuous and excessive, so must our responses be.” There is nothing impious in a little worshipful bling. Kintsugi, as both books indicate, is a glue for scattered ideas. But its core story, of repair that dignifies the fractures and scars of the past, is as simple as it is seductive. Today’s artists are doubtless sifting through the shards of this pandemic era, looking for a healing, golden join. ■