FOR A MAN who was born with a silver spoon in his mouth, David Cameron has a remarkable ability to attract bad luck. His decision to bet the country’s future on the result of a referendum on the European Union was one of the most disastrous gambles in British history, up there with Lord North’s decision to impose taxes on tea in the American colonies. Now his post-political career is collapsing in ruins. The story starts in 2012, when the late Jeremy Heywood, one of the most revered civil servants of his generation, gave Lex Greensill a desk in the Cabinet Office, which sits at the heart of government. The two had got to know each other at Morgan Stanley, an investment bank. Mr Greensill seemed to have a clever solution to a problem that has plagued the public sector—the fact that the health service is slow to reimburse local pharmacies, which then run into financial difficulties. Mr Greensill duly applied supply-chain financing to this problem. In 2018, two years after Mr Cameron was ejected from office, Mr Greensill offered the former prime minister a job at Greensill Capital. Mr Cameron presumably saw a chance to make the sort of serious money with which public office had failed to provide him. There was talk of his share options being worth £60m ($80m) if the company floated. Mr Greensill presumably saw a chance to smooth relations with the public sector that was one of his most important clients—you don’t employ former prime ministers to do the accounts. Mr Cameron did his bit during the pandemic, sending text messages to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and other people at the Treasury, asking them to consider the company for a scheme to help firms through the turbulence. The trouble with this marriage made in heaven is that Greensill Capital has now collapsed and many companies that are dependent on it, including Liberty Steel, which employs some 5,000 people, are teetering on the edge. The Labour Party is talking about “a growing catalogue of allegations of cronyism”. The newspapers are full of stories about Mr Cameron feeding at the corporate trough, including a camping trip with Mr Greensill and Muhammad bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s crown prince. Everybody behaved properly, according to the rules. As a private citizen, Mr Cameron has every right to take a job advising a private business and, once employed, to seek to advance its legal interests. He broke none of the rules that cover what prime ministers (and indeed ministers) can do having left office, for they no longer apply once a prime minister has been out of office for two years. He broke none of the rules governing lobbying: they apply to professional lobbyists for hire rather than company employees. Mr Sunak ignored Mr Cameron’s messages. The relevant officials considered Mr Cameron’s request and politely turned it down. If that is cronyism, most of the world would kill for it. But the rules themselves are a problem, for they allow politicians to behave in a way that appears dodgy. It does not look good to the average voter that a former prime minister is trying to use the clout that he inevitably retains to feather his nest. This matters enormously, for two reasons. First, the public’s faith in the political class has collapsed, as the Brexit referendum demonstrated. Britain needs to rebuild trust in its politicians, and stories such as this one do not help. Second, a more permeable relationship between the public and private sector is a good thing—as the success of Kate Bingham, a venture capitalist who ran Britain’s vaccine task force, attests. But the British public has a visceral suspicion of private enterprise, and Mr Cameron’s relationship to Greensill will strengthen that hostility and make it harder for government to make use of the private sector in the future. Former prime ministers occupy an anomalous position—they may be treated as regular citizens from the point of view of business (after a short period of decompression) but they nevertheless enjoy a quasi-official status, particularly in the eyes of foreigners. They need to make a living for themselves and their families, and they move in a world of staggeringly rich and successful people, many of whom are happy to pay for the inside track on how government works. There was a time when the problem of what to do with exes could be allowed to take care of itself. A good many either died shortly after retiring (Disraeli and Churchill) or were rich enough to look after themselves (Lord North’s embarrassment at losing the American colonies was cushioned by the fact that he then inherited a fortune). But these days prime ministers are getting their jobs earlier—Mr Cameron was in his 40s when he left office—and are living longer. There are currently more former prime ministers alive than at any previous point in British history: five compared with the previous record of four. Britain needs to keep these proliferating former prime ministers on a tighter leash. The rules banning lobbying should be extended from two years to, say, ten, and former prime ministers should be required to register their interests in public. The government’s adviser on the ministerial code should be given more power to tackle dubious behaviour. But Britain also needs to give them more solid work to do. Many countries make detailed provisions for their former leaders: the United States provides them with a pension of $221,400, travel expenses of up to $1m, staff, office space and secret-service protection. Britain, which currently provides bare-bones support in the form of security and an office allowance, should move in the same direction. Serving prime ministers also need to put rivalries aside and try harder to find big public jobs for their predecessors. People who make it into Number 10 invariably have an unusual amount of energy. They should be given more opportunity to serve the nation and less to serve themselves. ■