IN MAY 1909 Claude Monet hosted “Paysages d’eau” (“Water Landscapes”) at the Durand-Ruel gallery in Paris. The exhibition showcased a series of paintings of the water garden at his house in Giverny, northern France, which he had renovated a few years earlier and framed with wisteria, irises, peonies and chrysanthemums. In previous renderings of the scene Monet had used the Japanese bridge as a focal point, with the bank and a sliver of sky visible. From 1903 onwards, Monet was more attentive to the pond itself—waking up early in order to capture how the light changed throughout the day—and he painted on several canvases simultaneously. Roger Marx, an art critic, expressed astonishment at how the artist experimented with perspective in these works: “No more earth, no more sky, no limits now.” “Sunset on the Sea, Pourville” (1882), currently on display at the Museum of Fine Arts (MFA) in Boston as part of the exhibition “Monet and Boston: Lasting Impression”, elicits a similar feeling of wonder. An iridescent sky meets the brushstrokes of a pink-blue sea; the sunset is streaked yellow, lavender, cerulean and verdigris. The colours meld into a textured impression of weather and light at a particular moment in time. There is no land in sight, but a faint horizon line, distant and blue, divides the sea from the sky. Given the privations of the past year, it is a pleasure to visit a museum at all. But to revisit Monet’s work presents a particular joy: the opportunity to consider with fresh eyes art which is so revered as to be flattened by familiarity, seen frequently in reproduction on screensavers, coffee mugs and postcards. The show, which features all 35 Monet oil paintings in the museum’s collection, reveals the richness of his oeuvre. It has been so popular that the MFA has announced it will mount another, different Monet exhibition, opening on April 17th. The varied textures of his canvases—light dabs of paint that evoke fragile flower petals, or the thick layers that coat his Rouen Cathedrals, such that they protrude from the canvas—cannot be captured in a photograph or on a screen. “There is something super tactile that I think is really satisfying about these works of art,” says Katie Hanson, the exhibition’s curator. “The cathedrals, for example, Monet himself described them as ‘encrustations’ of paint. When you see them in reproduction, you don’t get a sense for the topography of the surface, but when you’re with the work of art itself, you can really get lost in the paint.” Monet painted the Rouen Cathedral repeatedly, working on as many as 14 different versions at once; he exhibited them as a series of 20 in 1895. Two of them are on display side-by-side in Boston, and looking at them together you can track the change in the light and the angle of his perspective. Monet often worked iteratively, returning obsessively to the same scene over and over in different lights and weather. (In the summers of 1896 and 1897, he set up his easel in a boat at 3 o’clock in the morning to paint the Seine in the morning mist.) This constant return and variation generates surprising drama and movement in static landscape scenes. “The variation is not only temporal, in terms of times of day and weather,” says Gloria Groom, curator at the Art Institute of Chicago, which is currently showing “Monet and Chicago”, another popular exhibition that draws from the institute’s extensive collections as well as rarely seen works from private collections in the area. “Thinking of the ‘Grainstacks’ paintings, each one of them has a different mood. They’re not just descriptive or narrative, those are really mood paintings.” Two of Monet’s “Grainstack” paintings are on display in Boston, one painted in winter daylight and another at sunset in a warmer season. For many, this has been a year of visual deprivation, but in an odd way these series of paintings distill the experience of lockdowns over the past year—of looking out of the same window each day at the same stretch of street or trees. Monet’s work reveals the rewards of this kind of repeated attention, which shifts and refracts with the season or the time of day. Even when you are sequestered in the same spot, his art suggests, there is much to see. “Monet and Boston: Lasting Impression” continues at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, until March 28th. “Monet and Boston: Legacy Illuminated” will open on April 17th and continue until October 17th. “Monet and Chicago” continues at the Art Institute of Chicago until June 14th