ON MARCH 5TH at its annual parliament, the National People’s Congress (NPC), China’s government revealed an economic-growth target of “more than 6%” for this year, a bar it is expected to clear with ease. Take the latest data. China’s key economic indicators for January and February, published on Monday, were buoyant. Industrial production and retail sales, for example, are soaring—35.1% and 33.8% higher than a year ago, respectively, beating consensus forecasts. Fixed-asset investment surged by 35% year on year, but still fell below expectations. This year’s rocket-fuelled figures are even harder to decipher than usual because they are compared with record lows last year, during the first wave of covid-19 outbreaks. Macquarie, a bank, says that if you remove the effect of the pandemic, underlying retail sales were up by 3.1% for the first two months of 2021. This implies consumption accelerated after a few small outbreaks were brought under control in Beijing in January. Oxford Economics, a research group, says it expects household consumption to become the main engine of economic growth from the second quarter of 2021, as travel restrictions are eased. But in the first quarter, growth will remain sluggish. The new budget, also unveiled at the NPC, offers an interesting insight into what growth the government is actually expecting for the year ahead. It says the fiscal deficit will be 3.57trn yuan ($32.8bn), or 3.2% of GDP, in 2021. That suggests nominal GDP is expected to reach 111.6trn yuan in 2021, ignoring any rounding—an annual growth rate of 8.9% before adjusting for inflation. From 2012 to 2019, China’s real growth met its targets with suspicious precision. But nominal growth often fell short of the pace implied in the budget. Perhaps inflation was unexpectedly weak. But it is odd for inflation to undershoot when real growth does not. Another possibility is that statisticians understate the rise in prices so as to overstate the rise in output. If so, China’s “real” growth is not as real as it claims to be. Editor’s note: This is an updated version of an article that first appeared in the Finance section of the print edition under the headline “‘Real’ growth in China”.