COPING WITH covid-19 has brought together medical technologies that will bring huge benefits to human health. The basis of this is the application of genetics to medicine in a systematic and transformative way. The SARS-CoV-2 genome was published just weeks after a new pneumonia was spotted in China. That feat has since been repeated with getting on for 1m different samples of SARS-CoV-2 in the hunt for fearsome variants, like the one ravaging Brazil. The original genome sequence became the basis for the vaccines deployed against the virus. Ever-better ways of synthesising and editing genes have enabled miraculous breakthroughs. The chart shows how the companies developing RNA vaccines—messages written in genetic code—against covid-19 have been rewarded by the stockmarket. Asia’s manufacturing complex has benefited from resilient demand for electronics and consumer goods during the pandemic. Buoyant exports have led to surging foreign-exchange reserves. For small, open economies, they help offer protection against disruptive exchange-rate lurches. But they can also attract criticism about alleged currency manipulation. Turkey’s financial authorities can only look on in envy. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s reckless decision to fire the admired central-bank governor, Naci Agbal, has led to another currency crisis. The government’s self-inflicted wound holds lessons for other emerging markets, notably that it is risky to compromise central-bank independence if you rely on foreign capital. Two poor countries offer contrasting examples of the same combination: economic success and authoritarian politics. Admirers of Rwanda’s government hail its economic achievements: annual GDP growth in the 15 years to 2019 averaged almost 8%, double the African mean. But a new book presents devastating evidence for the case against President Paul Kagame, as a ruthless dictator and regional menace. Criticism of Sheikh Hasina Wazed, Bangladesh’s prime minister since 2009, is usually less extreme. But, as the country celebrates its 50th independence day, her increasingly authoritarian ways are damaging the very traits that have made it such a remarkable developmental success. With $1.9trn in fiscal stimulus working its way through the American economy, and much more perhaps to follow, hawks are warning about possible overheating. But, as America begins to emerge from the pandemic, its companies are celebrating the current policy and market environment as what some see as the greatest convergence of pro-industry forces in decades. Manufacturers look poised for a boom. Goods producers are enjoying the fastest growth in new orders in more than six years. American fintech companies are also in a bullish mood. Lockdowns have led to a surge in online payments and experimentation by consumers. A large swathe of the Mountain West of America has been afflicted by drought for nearly a year. Average snowpack has been decreasing for decades. Scientists think that warmer winters due to carbon-dioxide emissions have made droughts more frequent. In China, water scarcity has made the government the most enthusiastic promoter of cloud-seeding among the 50 or so countries that practise it. But rainmakers struggle to prove that they cause any more water to fall than would have been the case otherwise. Similarly, supposedly sustainable investors are also finding it hard to demonstrate that putting climate change at the heart of their strategies is actually having an impact in reducing carbon emissions.