GENOME SEQUENCING, crucial to the original identification of SARS-CoV-2 and to providing the templates for the vaccines against it, also offered a new way to watch the pandemic unfold. Viruses often make mistakes when they copy their genomes, a crucial step in reproduction, and that means they accumulate mutations pretty quickly. Sequence enough samples over time and you can see evolution in action. For the first six months of the pandemic this was a matter of some academic interest—and more than a little foreboding. Last autumn the bad news that students of evolution had been fearing began to appear in the data. The first inkling was in a sample taken on September 20th from a patient in Kent, a county at Britain’s southeastern tip. When sequenced by the Covid-19 Genomics UK Consortium, the biggest such evolution-monitoring effort in the world, it was found to have an unusually large number of mutations. Subsequent sequencing showed that this new variant was spreading fast. By November it was responsible for a quarter of new cases in London. By December that had risen to almost 60%. By February it was accounting for more than 90% of the infections in some British regions—and also, according to Hezi Levi, the head of the health ministry, in Israel, too. What had started British had predictably spread worldwide. By the middle of March 25-30% of new American cases were thought to be caused by B.1.1.7, as it is known. Its rapid spread made B.1.1.7 a “variant of concern” even before evidence began to demonstrate that it is more likely to cause disease than the original strain. Two other concerning variants have now joined it; B.1.351, initially found in South African samples taken in October, and P.1, which began circulating in Brazil in November or December, though its existence was noted only after it was found in January in four visitors from Brazil to Japan. P.1, like B.1.1.7 spreads fast; it is threatening to overwhelm Brazil’s intensive-care capacity. But that is not its only unfortunate innovation. Like B.1.351, P.1 also wrong-foots antibodies produced to recognise the original version of SARS-CoV-2—whether the antibodies come about naturally in infected bodies, are created in pharmaceutical companies’ cell cultures, or are the result of vaccination. In all three cases mutations are concentrated in the gene which describes the spike protein: one mutation in that gene, N501Y, is common to all three. That is unlikely to be a coincidence. Rather, it suggests this mutation helps the virus. Spike binds to proteins on human cells in a way that lets the virus gain entrance to them. The bits of it that do the binding are thus crucial to its success, and the best possible targets for antibodies. If evolution were to have goals for it, they would be that it should bind to the target better and that the bits that do that binding should be harder for antibodies to neutralise. The mutations that have accumulated in the variants of concern seem to do just that. N501Y makes binding tighter. E484K, also called “eek”, makes antibodies less effective. Originally a feature of P.1 and B.1.351, it has now been found in samples of B.1.1.7 from both Britain and America. These variants are a problem for Eli Lilly and Regeneron, the companies offering antibodies as drugs against the virus. Both firms sell cocktails containing two different antibodies. One of Lilly’s antibodies does not work against B.1.351. The other looks a bit iffy—as does one of Regeneron’s. Antibodies are something of a niche concern. More worrying is what the new variants mean for vaccination. A preliminary study shows that volunteers in trials of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine who were infected with an eek-free B.1.1.7 fared similarly, in terms of protection against disease, to those infected with earlier variants, though the efficacy was both a bit lower and more uncertain. This was despite antibodies from those volunteers being less able to bind to B.1.1.7 particles than to other virus particles, because vaccines stimulate more of the immune system than just the antibody-making bit. The Novavax vaccine, which consists of spike proteins made in cell culture and is not yet approved, provides good protection against disease for B.1.1.7 and fair protection (60%) for B.1.351. The Johnson&Johnson vaccine also shows efficacy against that variant. No tests of how the other vaccines deal with the variants of concern have yet been made public. But all the vaccine-makers know that they need to show the immune system versions of spike that elicit a response capable of handling the entire range of variants. The mRNA and adenovirus companies are making sure they can load the gene sequence for a new version of the spike protein into their production systems if need be. Novavax would need to re-engineer the cells used to produce its version of spike. To know when vaccines need updating—which may need to be regularly, as for flu vaccines—other countries will need to emulate Britain’s diligence in surveillance-by-sequencing. At the moment British samples dominate the sequence database at Gisaid, an international partnership based in Munich that was originally set up to track influenza outbreaks (see chart). More diligent inspection in America is already picking up new variants. B.1.526, which seems to have taken off in New York late last year, boasts both the eek mutation and D253G, which has similar effects. A study by a group led by Jeremy Kamil of Louisiana State University, made available as a preprint on February 14th, has identified seven variants that look concerning. Though apparently of independent origin, most share a spike mutation called Q677P, which suggests it is another change strongly favoured by natural selection. Spotting variants wherever they turn up, and assessing quickly what added risk they pose, must now be a central part of fighting the virus. And it may also end up being a way to monitor the transition, if it happens, of SARS-CoV-2 to endemicity. New pathogens often follow an evolutionary course whereby they become less virulent, and thereby more transmissible. Some people think this may explain the origins of the four relatively benign coronaviruses known to cause symptoms commonly badged as “the common cold”. A study published in 2005 of the modern variants of one of these, OC43, suggested their most recent common ancestor lived in about 1890. That coincides with a pandemic known historically as Russian flu, though there is no evidence that influenza viruses, then unknown to science, were the cause. It therefore seems plausible the real cause was a virulent ancestor of OC43. The idea that SARS-CoV-2 might go the same way and evolve, eventually, into something no more threatening than a cold might sound like wishful thinking. But it is possible. ■