FOR ALL its failures in controlling covid-19, America has done an admirable job fighting it with jabs. As of March 11th the country had administered 98m vaccine doses, according to the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. And as the tally of vaccinated people has climbed, so too has public trust. Many who were once uncertain about getting the jab are now queuing for it. The share of adults saying they are “not sure” whether they will get a vaccine has plummeted from 36% to 18%. And yet around one in four adults, or roughly 66m Americans, insist that they will not get the coronavirus vaccine. This figure has held more or less steady for months. Who are these never-jabbers? According to survey data provided to The Economist by YouGov, a pollster, they are younger, poorer, and less educated than the general population. They are also more likely to live in the South and the Midwest. The never-jabbers are more religious, too. A disproportionate share say that religion is very important to them; many are evangelical or “born again” Christian. There has been much hand-wringing about vaccine distrust among African-Americans, but never-jabbers are not disproportionately black. Perhaps unsurprisingly never-jabbers are more likely to vote Republican; just one in ten is a Democrat. Indeed, party identification is one of the strongest predictors of hostility to the coronavirus vaccine. Republicans are nearly four times as likely as Democrats to refuse the jab. The only variable that does a better job of predicting vaccine mistrust is whether one believes in vaccine-related conspiracy theories. Respondents who believe that vaccines cause autism, that the government is using the vaccine roll-out to microchip the population or that the vaccine can alter a recipient’s DNA are far more likely to refuse one. Eight in ten never-jabbers endorse at least one such theory. The prevalence of these ideas risks prolonging America’s battle with the virus. On March 11th, in his first prime-time address to the nation, President Joe Biden directed states to make all adults eligible for vaccinations by May 1st so that Americans will be able to celebrate together again by the July 4th holiday. This goal seems achievable, but if tens of millions continue to spurn the jab, the fireworks may have to wait.