THIRTEEN COVID-19 vaccines have so far been approved for emergency use in at least one country. But none has been authorised for use in children, who are less vulnerable to the disease. That may soon change. On March 16th Moderna, an American drugmaker, announced that it had administered the first jabs in its trial involving children aged between six months and 12 years. Pfizer, another American firm, is already testing its shot in children over 12; AstraZeneca, a British-Swedish company, will shortly begin trials of its vaccine in those aged six to 17. Why do clinical trials for children differ from those for adults, and what difference will vaccines for children make in the fight against covid-19? Until now, children have not been the primary target of covid-19 vaccine developers because so few get sick. However, there is strong evidence that vaccinating them would help protect the whole population. Children with no symptoms can still catch and pass on the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes covid-19. There are also rare cases in which infected children have developed a potentially fatal condition called multisystem inflammatory syndrome. And some suffer persistent symptoms similar to the “long covid” seen in some adults. It is not clear why children suffer less than adults from covid-19, but some studies have linked it to changes in people’s immune systems as they grow older. The immune system comes in two forms. The first, innate, is present in the body from birth and is the immediate response to injuries, foreign bodies and pathogens. The second, adaptive, is acquired as people grow up and kicks in when the innate system fails to prevent a pathogen from spreading (it also remembers viruses it has previously encountered). It is possible that children’s innate system is better at recognising new pathogens and fighting them than that of adults. If differences in the immune system cause covid-19 to affect children and adults in different ways, the same may be true for vaccines (which carry out a mock attack on the body). That makes it important to prove that vaccines are both safe and effective for people of all ages. Once researchers have shown that this is true in adults they conduct further studies on younger people, starting with teenagers, then children and infants, a process known as “de-escalation”. The clinical trials of covid-19 vaccines in children differ from those already carried out in adults. The trials in children look at how many antibodies they produce in response to the doses, to see whether they are likely to get similar protection as adults (although the trials also measure other markers of success, such as side-effects, case numbers and symptoms). They also tend to be smaller, as data from vaccinated adults will soon provide clues about the levels of antibodies or other markers of immunity against SARS-CoV-2. Moderna, for example, recruited more than 30,000 people for its phase-3 trial, which led to the jab’s approval for use in adults by America’s Food and Drug Administration. Its latest trial of children involves just 6,750 participants. In many countries the hope is that one day mass vaccination will help achieve herd immunity, whereby covid-19 stops spreading in the population when a sufficient share has become resistant to the virus, as a result of either previous infection or vaccination. Data from places that have already vaccinated a large proportion of their citizens, such as Israel and Britain, show that the jabs are working. But around a quarter of the world’s people are under 14 years old. Until they are vaccinated, stopping the spread of covid-19 entirely will be impossible. Preliminary data from the trials in young people could be available as early as this summer. The sooner children get a vaccine, the greater the chances of taming the virus. Dig deeper All our stories relating to the pandemic and the vaccines can be found on our coronavirus hub. You can also listen to  The Jab, our new podcast on the race between injections and infections, and find trackers showing the global roll-out of vaccines, excess deaths by country and the virus’s spread across Europe and America.