THE FLOTILLA of tugs and a giant digger were rendered tiny against the backdrop of the Ever Given, underscoring the scale of their task. One of the world’s largest container ships was wedged athwart the Suez canal on March 24th, apparently blown off course by high winds. The problem for global shipping seems immense as a traffic jam of ships formed along one of the world’s most important sea-lanes. Nearly 19,000 vessels plied the 193km maritime shortcut last year, carrying 12% of global trade by volume and 10% of the world’s oil. The price of crude shot up by 5% on news of the accident. Even a short closure of the bottleneck threatens severe disruption. Greg Knowler of JOC, a research firm, notes that supply chains linking Asia and Europe are “stretched to the limit” by several factors, not least a surge in demand for tech goods and shortages of shipping containers in some important ports. The sight of a blockage on its main source of foreign earnings will have worried Egypt’s government, too. The country has been doing all it can to attract more business to the canal. In 2015 it spent $8bn on an expansion project to cut waiting times. Despite the pandemic, revenues dipped only slightly in 2020 compared with the year before, to $5.6bn. That is in part because Egypt reduced transit fees last year for some vessels (they could amount to $700,000 for a ship the size of the Ever Given) to deter them from taking the alternative route around the Cape of Good Hope. This more circuitous journey can take a week but cheap fuel made it more attractive. More oil could eventually flow through pipelines, such as one between Israel and the United Arab Emirates, which reopened recently as diplomatic relations the Jewish state and its Arab neighbours continue to improve. Meanwhile, a thawing Arctic may also open up trade routes that compete with Suez. In the short run, though, the canal is likely to remain a conduit for crude, and much else besides. Once, that is, the Ever Given is back on course. Correction: an earlier version of this article muddled up the Cape of Good Hope with Cape Horn. Apologies