PARAGUAYANS ARE accustomed to paying out of pocket for things the state is supposed to provide. But on March 2nd, with covid-19 deaths reaching record highs, the relatives of hospitalised patients took to social media to denounce shortages of drugs, which they were told to buy at bloated prices from private pharmacies. Some of the drugs had labels suggesting they were meant for public hospitals but had been traded on the black market. That was the “the drop that spilled the glass”, says Esperanza Martínez, a senator and former health minister. On March 5th thousands of protesters mobbed the streets outside congress, throwing stones and burning tyres. One person was killed in clashes with the police. Paraguay was spared the worst of the pandemic in 2020 thanks to a strict lockdown, which most people respected. That makes the government’s impotence even more infuriating for law-abiding citizens. Many politicians seem out of touch. In January the president, Mario Abdo Benítez, told journalists that he had stopped reading the news, “for [my] mental health”. Despite having had a year to prepare for the crisis, the government has added few intensive-care beds, spent less than half of roughly $2bn borrowed from international institutions to meet the emergency, and imported just 4,000 vaccine doses into a country of 7m people. Mr Abdo’s Colorado Party has governed Paraguay almost without interruption since 1947. It is a well-oiled machine that has broadly kept the country stable. The party is currently controlled by Horacio Cartes, a former president and tobacco tycoon who has faced accusations that his wealth was fed by cigarette smuggling, drug-trafficking and money-laundering, which he denies. Over the past decade, while Latin America as a whole has buckled under rising debt and a post-commodity-boom hangover, Paraguay has prospered. During Mr Cartes’s term, from 2013 to 2018, GDP growth averaged 6% a year (though public debt also rose). But the party has failed to keep its promises to clean up governance. Tax revenue is less than 15% of GDP. Public servants supplement their low salaries with bribes and petty embezzlement. Paraguay ranks 137th out of 179 countries on Transparency International’s corruption perception index, behind only Venezuela within South America. The pandemic, more than any previous crisis, has made Paraguayans resent the lack of distinction between the state and the Colorado Party. News of a nurse handing out drugs while canvassing for a city council campaign might earn votes in normal times. This month, it elicited outrage. In an interview with The Economist in December, Paraguay’s economy minister boasted of initiatives to increase transparency. David Riveros, the head of ReAcción, a Paraguayan NGO that exposes corruption, says they lack teeth. In 2016, with funding from USAID, Mr Riveros helped create an online platform for the health ministry that tracked publicly purchased supplies and allowed citizens to report the absence of drugs that were supposed to be in stock. It was shut down without explanation in late 2019 and wasn’t revived for the pandemic. Corruption scandals surrounding medical supplies surfaced anyway. “When there’s impunity in the face of supposed transparency, it’s an insult to the citizenry,” Mr Riveros says. Protests have occurred every night this week in Asunción, Paraguay’s capital. The unrest has brought comparisons to the marzo paraguayo, in March 1999, when seven people were killed in protests after the murder of the vice-president, Luis Argaña. Protests in March 2017 over a proposed constitutional amendment that would have allowed Mr Cartes to run for re-election were deemed the second marzo paraguayo. So far it seems as if the third will end as the first two did: with a deal within the Colorado Party. Paraguay doesn’t have powerful student movements like Chile’s, or a revolutionary tradition like Bolivia’s. Argaña used to joke that “the Colorado Party is the biggest party in the country and, also, the biggest opposition party.” It is currently split between legislators loyal to Mr Cartes and a smaller group loyal to Mr Abdo. In 2019 the cartistas saved Mr Abdo from impeachment after details leaked about a secret deal between Brazil and Paraguay for energy generated by the Itaipu dam, which sits on their border. Most Paraguayans considered the agreement detrimental. Now, true opposition legislators again say they plan to vote on Mr Abdo’s impeachment, and Mr Cartes says his cohort in congress will thwart the attempt. That strengthens his grip on the party. “It’s a kind of permanent blackmail,” says Milda Rivarola, a political analyst. The replacement of four cabinet ministers, including the health minister, failed to placate the protesters, who understood that the gesture was intended for Mr Cartes, rather than the people. “They’re all from the same party, with the same ideology,” says Kevin, a 25-year-old media adviser who has attended the protests. He hopes to see his frustration reflected at the ballot box in 2023, when Paraguay holds its next presidential election. In the meantime, knowing how politics works in Paraguay, he and other protesters have taken their chants of “¡Que se vayan todos!” (“everybody out”) to the door of Mr Cartes’s house.