FOR DECADES Britain has boasted of its diminutive nuclear status. Of the five nuclear-armed powers recognised by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), Britain’s arsenal is the smallest and the only one with a single means of delivery—submarines. Successive British governments pruned nuclear forces by more than half between the 1980s and 2000s, eager to show progress towards disarmament. Yet buried in a 114-page review of foreign and defence policy, published on March 16th, was a striking announcement: for the first time since the cold war, Britain’s stockpile will grow. At the height of that geopolitical contest, Britain had more than 500 nuclear warheads, deliverable by bombers and submarines. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Britain ditched the bombers and dramatically cut its arsenal. A defence review in 1998 said that Britain would cut the number of operationally available warheads to fewer than 200. Another review in 2006 cut that figure to below 160. And in 2010 the government announced that the overall stockpile—which includes operationally available warheads and those in reserve—would fall from 225 to fewer than 180 by the mid-2020s, a decision reiterated by the Conservative-led government in 2015. That was enough, it was thought, to inflict unacceptable damage on Russia, the main adversary. This week’s review suggests that calculation has changed. “Some states are now significantly increasing and diversifying their nuclear arsenals,” it warns, referring to Russia, China and possibly North Korea. “They are investing in novel nuclear technologies and developing new ‘warfighting’ nuclear systems”—in other words, nukes designed for military advantage on the battlefield rather than deterrence. In response, Britain will raise the ceiling of its overall stockpile to 260 warheads. It will also stop publishing figures for the numbers of missiles and warheads carried aboard each submarine, with the aim of “complicat[ing] the calculations of potential aggressors”. In theory, more Chinese warheads or better Russian ones ought not to change Britain’s nuclear needs one way or the other. Britain keeps a submarine at sea at all times, in a practice known as continuous-at-sea deterrent, or CASD. The advantage of having one’s nuclear weapons hidden in the ocean, rather than on land, is that they are at little risk of being taken out by enemy ones, no matter how numerous or sophisticated those might be. Meanwhile, each British submarine could easily wipe out Moscow or Beijing. So why more warheads? One possibility is that Britain is worried about future improvements in Russian or Chinese missile defences that would mean fewer warheads getting through, thus requiring more to be fired in the first place to inflict the same level of damage. Another rationale is that Britain may wish to put more than one submarine to sea in future, hedging against the risk of a breakthrough in technology for anti-submarine warfare. The review’s reference to “doctrinal threats” offers yet another clue. Heather Williams of King’s College London points out that Russia is developing dual-capable weapons—missiles that can carry either conventional or nuclear warheads—and lowering its nuclear threshold, meaning that it might use nuclear weapons earlier in a conflict. If Russia were to use low-yield weapons in this way, it would be disproportionate to retaliate by destroying Moscow. But if Britain wanted to respond in kind—the yield of its own W76 warheads can be reduced, up to a point—it would need to be sure of having sufficient remaining warheads for a subsequent and larger nuclear exchange. More cynical observers suggest that the move is less about the fine-grained details of nuclear strategy than about Britain's desire to thump its chest. Whatever the precise reasoning, the timing could hardly be worse. The NPT’s five-yearly review conference is five months away and the mood is acrimonious. Many non-nuclear states are furious that nuclear-armed ones are doing little to slash their arsenals. China, India, Pakistan and North Korea have all been growing their forces in recent years, while arms-control between America and Russia has faltered. The worry is that trust in the NPT may ebb away, weakening non-proliferation efforts. In recent decades, Britain has been a “leader in nuclear disarmament,” says Dr Williams. Its decision to change course after decades of steady reductions is not just a blow to disarmers, but also a reflection of the gloomy nuclear mood.