STREET NAMES do not often boast much political significance. But in Caerphilly they do. Lansbury Park, a 1960s council estate that sprawls through a formidable Welsh valley, is no exception. Named for the former Labour leader George Lansbury, its street names hold similar commemorations to the party’s long dead heroes. Among them are Attlee Court, named for the party’s beloved former prime minister, and Snowden Court, for Philip Snowden, a Labour chancellor in the 1920s. Their names may live on, but their politics do not. “Get Labour out,” cheers one resident when asked about her allegiances. Another resident, a former Labour voter who supported Brexit, says he now wants an independent Wales. “If we want to be sheep and follow Westminster we might as well go and live on the mountain,” he explains. But he has no interest in voting again, since politicians cannot be trusted. That is until Delyth Jewell, the local Plaid Cymru candidate in the forthcoming election for the Senedd, the Welsh assembly, shows up. The party is a nationalist outfit which campaigns for Welsh independence. That and the promise to reopen a local doctor’s surgery convinces the resident. “Might as well give her a go.” Caerphilly is a top Plaid Cymru target. The seat is part of the Senedd’s very own “red wall”, a stretch of 23 seats in South Wales that is essential to gaining control of the 60-seat devolved administration—and where the Labour Party is, for now, still dominant. But there are signs the party’s grip is weakening. It is facing the twin forces of nationalism and working-class conservatism, which ousted Labour in Scotland and in northern England respectively. Success is no longer guaranteed. Plaid Cymru pledges a referendum on independence by 2026. That is ambitious. Yet support for independence is rising. Polling by ICM finds that 14% of people support it, up from 5% in 2014. In February Savanta ComRes, another pollster, found 35% in favour. Yes Cymru, a group which campaigns for independence, says its membership has surged to 18,000 from 2,000 last year. New members are attracted as much by the idea of more local, responsive governance as cultural identity. They include David Buttress, a former chief executive of JustEat UK, a food delivery firm. “As a boy growing up in the Gwent valley, life was more pragmatic than sitting around a university lecturer’s table talking about Welsh nationalism,” he says. “It doesn’t come from that place for me.” Younger voters are also supportive. A poll by YouGov for Yes Cymru last year found that 43% of 18- to 24-year-olds supported independence. Brexit and the increased visibility of the Welsh government during the covid-19 pandemic have helped. Welsh Labour is an electoral behemoth. The party has won the largest share of the vote at every general election since 1922 and every Senedd election since the assembly’s creation. But these days it is wary of the nationalist threat, and responding to it. Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, has called for Britain to be “radically redrawn”, leaving Westminster to handle only defence and the economy. But his radicalism may not save him: polling suggests he may lose his seat in May. YouGov and Yes Cymru found that a narrow majority of Labour voters would back independence. Roger Awan-Scully, a political scientist at Cardiff University, says Welsh Labour is unlike its Scottish sister party, which has shed most of its nationalist supporters and embraced unionism. “The party may be arriving at a point where [it]…can no longer straddle awkward divides,” thinks Mr Awan-Scully. The Conservatives are staking a claim for the unionist vote. “Our vision is a truly British vision and one we are unashamedly proud to promote,” says Gruff Parry, the Tory Senedd candidate in Torfaen. The leader of the Welsh Conservatives, Andrew R. T. Davies, has called Mr Drakeford “the biggest threat to the Union after Nicola Sturgeon.” Such rhetoric ought to appeal to the fifth of Welsh voters who feel either strongly English and British, or just strongly English. Labour’s future in Wales may therefore depend on just how much tribal hatred of the Tories has survived. Of this, Hefin David, Caerphilly’s current Labour Senedd member, is confident. “South Wales was hit so hard by Thatcherism that we still remember it,” he reckons. The other hope is that Abolish the Welsh Assembly, a small outfit, will pick up votes that would otherwise have gone to the Conservatives. Their name represents a proposition that 20% of Welsh people now back, according to Beaufort Research, a market-research firm. A Labour insider says the party expects some sort of coalition with Plaid Cymru after the election. Mr Awan-Scully thinks that although the combined forces of the Tories and Plaid Cymru will not demolish Labour’s Red Wall, they will chip away at it. But then, says Richard Wyn Jones, director of the Wales Governance Centre at Cardiff university, there is a “long history of people writing articles suggesting ‘this is the election that Labour’s dominance in Wales ends,’ then it doesn’t.” ■