“IT IS THE history of Tottenham,” once gloated Giorgio Chiellini of Juventus after his team knocked Tottenham Hotspur out of the Champions League, Europe’s top football competition. London’s “Spurs” have secured just two trophies in the past 30 years, both from the relatively minor League Cup. On April 25th Tottenham will have a shot at a third, when they face Manchester City in the League Cup final. Betting markets give them just a 25% chance. Are Tottenham truly cursed? They are far more successful than most clubs, who languish in lower divisions. To be seen as cursed, a team must be good enough to inspire realistic dreams of glory, but useless enough not to fulfil them. Many supporters who blame divine intervention simply overrated their teams in the first place. To estimate the odds that some Arsenal-loving god has it in for Tottenham, we ran a study. We defined “cursedness” as the gap between a team’s trophy haul and how it should have fared, based on the calibre of its players. If some clubs regularly win less than their talent implies, another factor (be it mundane or supernatural) may be at work. But if results mostly mirror players’ skill, teams seen as hapless underachievers may in fact be talentless underdogs. To determine how fans value different competitions, we ran a poll on Twitter. On average, respondents said that if a Champions League trophy was worth ten “prestige points”, a domestic league title would get nine. Other knockout cups scored 2.5-5.5. Next, we calculated expected performance. From 2006 on, we got good predictions of league tables by adding up estimates from Transfermarkt, a football website, of sale prices for every player on a team’s roster. For earlier years, we estimated these values using performance-based ratings from ClubElo, a statistical website. Our study did find circumstantial evidence for a hex. In 2006-20, Spurs were the worst underachievers in Europe, with just 2.5 prestige points against an expected 32. However, such periods of underperformance were common. A truly cursed club would let fans down for generations. And Spurs cannot claim outrageous fortune in the long run. In the 1970s and 1980s they won more trophies than expected, by beating stronger rivals in knockout cups. Overall, we found no correlation in over- or underperformance from one decade to the next. Clubs that won more than they “should” have tended to drift back towards the pack, whereas ones that looked cursed mostly got their just deserts later on. The best predictor of a team’s results is the players on the pitch, regardless of improbable successes or failures in the past. That is good news for Spurs. If they sustain their 2016-20 level of skill, they have a 90% shot to win another trophy by 2026.■ Sources: ClubElo.com; Transfermarkt.com; The Economist