Lean Fall Stand. By Jon McGregor. Fourth Estate; 288 pages; £14.99. To be published in America in September by Catapult; $26 IN “RESERVOIR 13”, a novel by Jon McGregor published in 2017, a teenage girl disappears while on a winter break with her family in the Peak District, a region in the north of England. As the case goes unsolved, and is gradually forgotten, the book changes focus and looks at the people directly and indirectly affected by the tragedy. Mr McGregor takes a similar approach in his new novel, “Lean Fall Stand”. The breathtaking opening chapters describe a research expedition which goes horribly and fatally wrong. It starts out as a white-knuckle ride of a story, before Mr McGregor changes course. Thomas and Luke, two post-doctoral researchers collecting geographic data, are dispatched to Antarctica to undertake months of essential fieldwork. Robert, an assistant technician and guide, with decades of experience and a somewhat sinister and controlling manner, is assigned to help them. Isolated in a tiny hut, the three men are caught off guard by a sudden fierce storm which, with protocol breached and communication lost, leads to the death of one of the young academics. Mr McGregor’s account ofthe early tensions within the group, particularly due to Robert’s alpha-male instincts, set against the backdrop of the blue stillness and unexpected savagery of the ice peaks and floes, could have made for an absorbing novel on its own. Instead, in a stunning move, the perspective switches solely to Robert—who suffered a stroke in the midst of the blizzard—and his family. His long and often tortuous journey back to health takes place in hospital, first in Santiago, then in Cambridge, and finally at home. For Anna, Robert’s wife, who has become accustomed to her own solitary, satisfactory existence as a respected researcher, his return upends not only her career but her expectations of this part-time marriage. Now she is a carer, receiving only occasional help from the couple’s grown-up children and harried occupational therapists. With skill and compassion Mr McGregor evokes an underfunded social-care system as well as the determination and inventiveness of its workers. Thanks to the efforts of Amira, one of his caregivers, Robert slowly rebuilds his strength and comes to terms with his condition. The author conveys so successfully the aftermath rather than the accident itself that the inquest into the catastrophe (and its cover-up) barely registers. Instead, this fine novel is reminiscent of “A Change of Climate”, Hilary Mantel’s novel of 1994, with its shifting perspectives and emphasis on a single, life-altering event. The far-ranging human story in “Lean Fall Stand” simultaneously unfolds and enfolds.