WHEN SOMEONE claims to have found a new way to make money out of an old idea, it usually pays to treat them with suspicion. Greensill Capital, a now-failed finance company, lent firms money secured against their invoices. This type of finance existed in ancient Mesopotamia. Lex Greensill, the business’s founder, updated it with some shiny new technology and what an early backer calls “homespun stories of growing up on a farm and seeing how late payments hurt his father”. Britain’s government greeted the charming Mr Greensill not with suspicion, but with a job in 10 Downing Street and a contract with the National Health Service (NHS). He was aided by the equally charming David Cameron, now embroiled in a lobbying scandal that will scotch any hope of restoring a reputation ruined by Brexit. The pair’s reach ran far. On April 13th it emerged that a senior public servant had combined his Cabinet Office job with one for the failed company. A day earlier Boris Johnson announced an inquiry into the government’s links with Greensill, led by Nigel Boardman, a corporate lawyer. Supply-chain finance is a simple solution to a common business problem: long payment terms. A retailer, for example, will want goods from its wholesalers upfront but may delay paying their invoices for weeks. Greensill, and firms like it, offer an alternative to waiting. They pay the money at once, for a small charge, and then cash in the invoices when they fall due. Greensill took the model a step further by bundling up its loans to firms as bonds for sale to yield-hungry investors. This year questions were raised about the creditworthiness of some of the companies issuing the invoices on which Greensill’s bonds were secured. That prompted Credit Suisse, a bank, to freeze funds linked to the firm. Companies that relied on liquidity provided by Greensill, such as Liberty Steel, a large British-based manufacturer, now face a financing gap. The affair has revealed some unflattering quirks of the British state. One is a readiness for quick fixes. In 2018, Greensill won a contract to help the NHS pay high-street pharmacies quicker. Neither that contract, nor another one to allow NHS staff access to their pay earlier, made Greensill much money. They did, however, feature in the firm’s pitches and boosted its credibility. An alternative solution—for the government simply to speed up payments—would have meant difficult reform of bureaucracy, while Greensill appeared to offer an instant fix. The second is a permeability to outside interests. Mr Greensill was made an unpaid government adviser on supply-chain finance in 2012, and had a Downing Street business card. He had previously worked alongside Jeremy Heywood, then the head of the civil service, as an investment banker at Morgan Stanley. Hardest to explain is how Bill Crothers, formerly the government’s chief procurement officer, was allowed to work part-time for Greensill while still holding his government post. Mr Crothers argues that he did not need to seek permission from the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (itself a pretty flimsy body) because the role was approved under an internal conflicts-of-interest policy at the Cabinet Office. There is no central register of second jobs. Civil servants now worry that Mr Crothers’ case will not be unique. Mr Cameron’s role exposes the weakness of Britain’s lobbying rules. He stood to make millions if the firm succeeded. He bombarded ministers and civil servants with messages, asking them to tweak the rules to allow Greensill to benefit from government-backed lending schemes for stricken companies. To the Treasury’s credit, the rules were not changed. As Mr Cameron was employed by the firm, rather than a third-party lobbyist, such messages were not subject to the disclosure rules put in place by his government. It has since emerged that, on a trip to Saudi Arabia to seek contracts, Mr Cameron and Mr Greensill (pictured, above) went camping with Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman. Mr Boardman’s report, due by the end of June, is not expected to pull punches. “He’s a hard-edged lawyer who understands finance and has no incentive to go easy on anybody,” says one former colleague. Mr Johnson and Mr Cameron have been rivals since they were at Eton together and the affair has yielded a striking volume of leaked material. Mr Johnson may hope the inquiry bolsters him while embarrassing his predecessor. Some Tories fear this is a dangerous move, and the government may get damaged in the fallout.■ A version of this article was published online on April 14th, 2021.