THE COVID-19 pandemic has upended the lives of billions of people since it first struck the Chinese city of Wuhan in December 2019. Official tallies reckon that it has caused  infections and led to the deaths of  people. The true toll  may be higher still. Vaccines to combat SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease, have been developed in record time. So far  countries have mass-vaccination programmes underway and together they have administered about  jabs. Our global covid-19 data tracker is updated twice a day with the latest figures.  Since the first inoculation in Britain on December 8th, mass-vaccination programmes are now active in every continent of the world. Still,  countries have not begun vaccinating, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. So far  of the world's adults have received one dose of a covid-19 vaccine. Vaccines for children are yet to be approved.  In total, countries have ordered about  vaccine doses from manufacturers to be delivered during 2021 (including vaccines not yet approved for use) according to a tally by Airfinity, a life-sciences data company. Although some manufacturers may face delays, that would mean there would be enough for  shots for each of the world's 5.2bn adults. However, these doses are not shared equally.  has signed contracts for enough jabs to give every adult  doses each, whereas  countries are expecting to receive just  doses per adult, on average. Many of the vaccines for poor and lower-middle income countries come from an international programme called COVAX. It plans to distribute as many as  doses to 91 countries this year that would otherwise struggle to have secured them. The Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine is the most widely-ordered vaccine. It has promised  doses to  different countries and organisations this year but has faced production delays. So far  vaccines producing a total of  doses have received regulatory approval for use in the countries for which they have been ordered.  A total of  countries have given first doses to over 50% of their adults.  leads the way to herd immunity, having given first doses to  of adults.  It is estimated that perhaps three-quarters of people infected with SARS-CoV-2 show no symptoms. The quality of testing regimes varies enormously across the world. Tanzania has not reported a single case since May 2020 simply because it has not tested anyone. That makes it tricky to compare the number of cases across countries. Nonetheless the trends can be informative. Cases have been rising fastest over the past seven days in . Cases can be hidden from view, but deaths are easier to detect even though reporting standards do vary, too. Fully  of the total global deaths from covid-19 have taken place in . Deaths over the past seven days are currently highest in  although they are rising fastest in .  Sources: Airfinity; Johns Hopkins University, CSSE; Our World In Data; United Nations; The Economist  To stay up to speed with The Economist’s latest coverage of the pandemic, visit our coronavirus hub; listen to The Jab, our podcast on the race between injections and infections; register to receive our weekly newsletter, which has a special edition showcasing our coronavirus coverage; and follow our other data trackers showing excess deaths by country and the virus’s spread across Europe and America.