IF CLIMATE ACTION was measured in speeches, America could feel sure of success. In the run-up to Joe Biden’s virtual climate summit, on April 22nd and 23rd, his deputies were everywhere: John Kerry, the special climate envoy, extolled decarbonised shipping; Jennifer Granholm, the energy secretary, touted green jobs with American unions; Antony Blinken, the secretary of state, explained climate diplomacy beside the Chesapeake Bay. But Mr Biden also offered something more tangible: a pledge to halve greenhouse-gas emissions from 2005 levels by 2030, with a goal of net-zero emissions by 2050. That counts as real progress for an American president, even if Donald Trump had not set a subterranean bar. An emissions target, or nationally determined contribution, is required by the Paris agreement which Mr Trump rejected and which Mr Biden rejoined. Setting a bold target now, the thinking goes, will encourage other countries to do the same before the next big United Nations climate conference, in Glasgow in November. America could support a transition to cleaner energy in poor countries and invest in innovations to be deployed the world over. Yet other leaders have reason to eye American promises with scepticism. In the 1990s Bill Clinton’s administration negotiated the Kyoto protocol, but the Senate declined to ratify it. Barack Obama pushed for the Paris agreement, only to have Mr Trump declare in 2017 that America would withdraw. Mr Obama promised to supply $3bn in climate finance for poorer countries; $2bn of that is still outstanding. After Mr Trump shunned the Paris agreement, green-minded governors pledged to support it. But they too are falling short. Those states are on track to limit their emissions by 18% below 2005 levels by 2025, according to the Environmental Defence Fund, compared with the 26-28% goal set by Mr Obama. Mr Biden’s infrastructure bill, presented in March, includes support for electric cars, renewables and innovation, as well as a clean-electricity standard requiring the power system to be emissions-free by 2035. It would be America’s most important climate legislation to date. Yet Republican opposition means that it may not pass the Senate as proposed. Even if it did, it might not do enough. Climate Action Tracker, a policy group, reckons that to meet the goals of the Paris agreement at least 95% of America’s car sales must be zero emissions by 2030. Mr Biden proposes support for electric cars, but no deadline for phasing out petrol-guzzling ones. “Eventually we are going to need additional climate legislation in the forms of standards, mandates, a carbon price,” argues Jason Bordoff, the co-dean of Columbia University’s Climate School. Mr Biden’s attempt to encourage decarbonisation abroad is no simpler. His budget proposes $1.2bn for the UN’s Green Climate Fund, but Mr Biden is also interested in mobilising green finance in other ways. America’s Development Finance Corporation may advance more clean-energy projects abroad as alternatives to coal. The White House has signalled support for climate-linked debt relief for poor and middle-income countries. Mr Bordoff points to debt relief in the 1980s tied to investments in biodiversity. “You might imagine something like climate-for-debt swaps to drive investment in low-carbon energy,” he says. However, America’s most important foreign interlocutor is the one with which relations have most steeply declined. The International Energy Agency expects China to account for more than half the rebound in coal consumption this year. Mr Kerry, in a visit to Shanghai this month, urged that climate be a “stand-alone” issue. Li Yifei, co-author of “China goes green”, contends that climate is inextricable from debates over geopolitical influence, intellectual property or industrial policy. “Climate change, by definition, is not a stand-alone issue,” he argues. Mr Biden’s meeting is a display of his determination. But success will depend on the co-operation of his adversaries, in Congress and in Beijing.■