IN DECEMBER 1903 Orville and Wilbur Wright’s Flyer lifted off the ground near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, and proved that powered, controlled flight was possible on Earth. On April 19th, at 7.34am Universal Time, NASA’s Ingenuity helicopter proved that the same is also possible on another world. Following an intricately planned flight sequence that was six years in the making, the 1.8kg craft spun its contra-rotating twin rotor-blades at 2,400rpm, to ascend from the surface of Mars. It climbed to an altitude of three metres, hovered for 30 seconds and then touched back down on the ground. In logging just 39.1 seconds of flight, Ingenuity opened a new chapter in aviation history. The helicopter had arrived on Mars on February 18th, attached to the belly of NASA’s Perseverance rover—which had had its own, far more violent and hair-raising ride through the Martian atmosphere as it made its way from space to a gentle landing on the planet’s surface, at Jezero Crater. Ingenuity was detached and dropped onto the surface on April 3rd and, in the intervening days, charged up its solar-powered batteries while NASA’s engineers at mission control in California tested and initialised the aircraft’s systems. Flying conditions on Mars are rather different from those on Earth. Though Mars has only a third of Earth’s gravity at its surface, which sounds as if it might make the task of flying there easier, its atmosphere has a mere hundredth of the density of Earth’s. That means there is a lot less air to push against when attempting to fly. To compensate, Ingenuity’s blades generate the lift they need by spinning five times faster than those of a typical helicopter on Earth. To keep its flight stable with such fast-moving blades requires hundreds of adjustments every second, based on a continuous stream of information from sensors aboard the aircraft. The aerodynamics are thus far too difficult for a human being to control in real time, so Ingenuity is built to fly autonomously. These complexities also explain the delay in the test flight. The demonstration was supposed to happen a week ago but, during a high-speed spin test of the rotors, a software problem prevented Ingenuity’s command sequence from working properly. That glitch was patched and Ingenuity’s successful flight brings space scientists closer to a new way to explore other worlds. Over several decades, NASA’s rovers have become ever-more sophisticated mobile laboratories. But they still move slowly and cautiously, and can operate only over reasonably flat ground. Future flying machines on Mars could carry large payloads or quickly survey wide areas of terrain, regardless of its roughness, to pinpoint places for further analysis by rovers. They could perhaps even go where no rover could ever venture—flying close-up to cliff faces that have interesting-looking rock formations, for example, or deep into cave systems. Despite the daunting engineering challenges required, NASA already has ambitious plans to use flying machines in future exploration. In 2026 a mission called Dragonfly will, if all goes well, be launched towards Titan, a moon of Saturn. Using eight rotors, this drone-like aircraft will carry its suite of scientific instruments to dozens of places, to examine the habitability of the local environment and perhaps look for signs of life. Ingenuity does not carry any scientific instruments, since it is just a technology demonstrator, though it will send back pictures of its travels over Mars. Despite its diminutive size and capabilities, however, the aircraft has now been given the official designation “IGY” by the International Civil Aviation Organisation—the United Nations’ civil aviation agency. In homage to the builders of Flyer, Ingenuity carried a small piece of cloth from Flyer’s wing; its Martian aerodrome will henceforth be known as Wright Brothers Field.