IN MAY 2020 the Australian Medical Association (AMA) issued a warning on mental health. Amid the SARS outbreak of 2003, the suicide rate rose among elderly women in Hong Kong. Studies suggest suicide is also more common during recessions. Based on these precedents, the AMA projected that covid-19 could cause a 25% increase in suicides. In some scenarios the AMA considered, extra deaths from self-harm could exceed those caused by covid-19 itself. Fortunately, this does not seem to have come to pass. Data from the Australian states of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria show that there were 2% fewer suicides between April and September of 2020 than in the same period of 2019. Australia has had a mild pandemic relative to other Western countries. However, even places that covid-19 has ravaged show a similar pattern. A recent study of 21 countries in the Lancet measured how suicide rates changed between the first and second quarters of 2020, after adjusting for seasonality and for the long-run trend in each country before the pandemic began. In the median jurisdiction with available numbers—many data sources were sub-national, such as provinces—there were 10% less suicides between April and June 2020 than expected, and 7% less than in the same months of 2019. Weighted by population, the average declines were 7% relative to expectations and 11% compared with 2019. The study focuses on the early months of the pandemic. In theory, the problem could have grown worse over time. Suicides did surge in Japan late last year, yielding the country’s first year-on-year rise since 2009. Its government appointed a “minister of loneliness” in response. However, in the first quarter of 2021 Japan’s rate returned to its pre-pandemic level. Recent numbers from other countries do not show evidence of a spike in suicides either. The Lancet authors also analysed the subset of jurisdictions for which data were available up to October, and found similar trends to those from the second quarter. Beyond that study, England reported a 12% decline in the year to September. And in America, a paper by scholars from the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention found a 6% drop in 2020. The surprising stability of suicide rates suggests that broadly shared gloom does not necessarily predict deep individual despair. One potential explanation is that by providing fiscal support that shielded citizens from the financial consequences of the pandemic, governments in rich countries have reduced a cause of stress that could, in the worst cases, lead to suicide. Few developing countries, which are less able to cushion economic blows, have released data for 2020. However, Malawi reported a 52% increase in suicides last year. Although the country did not have a severe covid-19 outbreak or a strict lockdown, its economy slowed down sharply. More data are needed from other countries with weak social safety nets to determine whether the financial lifelines offered by some governments have actually kept especially vulnerable people alive.■ Sources: “Suicide trends in the early months of the covid-19 pandemic”, by Jane Pirkis et al.; national statistics; The Economist