LAST WEEK America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and Federal Drug Administration (FDA) recommended that covid-19 vaccination sites temporarily stop administering the jab made by Johnson & Johnson (J&J), a one-dose alternative to the more popular two-shot variants from Pfizer and Moderna. American regulators were spooked after some recipients of the jab developed rare but severe blood clots. Proponents hoped that by seriously addressing potentially harmful side-effects, regulators would boost confidence in vaccines. Critics worried the decision might appear to give sceptics justification for their reluctance. New polling data confirm some fears, but dispel others. Between April 10th and 13th YouGov, a pollster, asked 1,500 Americans whether they thought the J&J dose was safe and whether they have been vaccinated or plan to do so when it is their turn. Overall, 48% of respondents said they thought the J&J vaccine was safe, compared with 30% who thought it was unsafe; confidence in the Pfizer and Moderna shots were 58% and 59%, respectively. YouGov also found that 59% of respondents had been or were planning to get vaccinated, compared with 23% who said they would not get a jab. Since YouGov was in the middle of conducting its survey when the government announced its recommendation to pause the J&J vaccine, the pollster was able to analyse whether the news affected opinions about vaccinations. YouGov estimated that the share of people who thought the J&J vaccine was safe fell by 15 percentage points as a consequence of the announcement, while the share who thought it was unsafe increased by 13 points. Data on Americans’ overall willingness to get vaccinated, however, look more optimistic. An analysis by The Economist found a five-point drop in the share of adults who said they will or have been vaccinated—but this was statistically insignificant. The share saying they would not get a shot rose, but by an even smaller two points. Numbers were not significantly different for people who said they paid a lot of attention to the news. This is a welcome sign, as avid news consumers are usually leading indicators of broader trends. The share of adults who say they will not get vaccinated hit 23% last week, according to our monthly rolling average, the lowest recorded so far. The government’s recommendation to pause the doling out of the J&J vaccine has significantly undermined public confidence in this specific shot. It may also prevent a few hundred thousand additional Americans from getting vaccinated against the virus. But so far overall confidence in covid-19 vaccination seems to be unaffected.