JUST AS THE pen is mightier than the sword, so arrogant stupidity can do a cause more damage than its opponent’s guns and bombs. Northern Ireland’s 100th anniversary falls next month, and the survival for a century of the six-county state which few expected to last should have been a moment of triumph for unionists. But the province’s streets have been lit by riots, and reunification of the island of Ireland seems likelier than it has for decades. Remarkably, it is a unionist leader who has done more to advance that nationalist ideal than decades of republican terrorism. More likely does not mean that a united Ireland is on the horizon. Polling is inconsistent. Last year a face-to-face survey in Northern Ireland showed 29% support for reunification; an online poll in January put the figure at 42% (see chart). Few believe that nationalists would win a snap referendum. But since the Brexit referendum of 2016, in which the United Kingdom as a whole voted to leave and Northern Ireland voted to stay, the polling trend has been towards unity. There was already relentless demographic change. This year's census is expected to confirm that Catholics now outnumber Protestants in a state whose boundaries sought to avoid that. In 1921 Protestantism was equated with support for British rule, Catholicism with a nationalist desire for independence. As crude as the division was, it made sense to leave as few reluctant Catholics as possible within the new state, trapped on the wrong side of the border. Northern Ireland’s founders viewed the link between religion and constitutional preference as essentially fixed at birth. Ninety years later, 21st-century unionists saw those two issues detach to an extent which would have astonished their forefathers. By 2016 there was significant Catholic support for the union; not enthusiastic, certainly not flag-waving, and rooted in self-interest. They didn’t want to give up the free health care of the National Health Service or to risk well-paid public-sector jobs. Since the Good Friday Agreement (GFA) of 1998, which brought peace and set up a devolved government in Belfast, residents could be legally Irish, enjoying taxpayer support for Irish sports, culture and language while territorially within the UK. And then unionism's leaders blew it. In five years Arlene Foster, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), has arguably done more to advance Irish unity than the 72-year-old Gerry Adams, former head of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army (IRA). Unionism’s failure since 2016 is not its first; that part of the story goes back to 1921. In the words of David Trimble, the unionist leader who won the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the GFA, “Ulster unionists, fearful of being isolated on the island, built a solid house, but it was a cold house for Catholics. And northern nationalists, although they had a roof over their heads, seemed to us as if they meant to burn the house down.” Guaranteed perpetual power in the new devolved parliament, unionist leaders oversaw discrimination in favour of their voters. Jobs and housing were divvied up on the basis of religion, while electoral boundaries were gerrymandered to reduce nationalist power. At the opening of the Northern Ireland Parliament in June 1921, King George V hoped for rapprochement: “I appeal to all Irishmen to pause, to stretch out the hand of forbearance and conciliation, to forgive and to forget, and to join in making for the land which they love a new era of peace, contentment, and goodwill.” Despite their loyalty to the monarch, unionists disregarded the King’s advice. That parliament collapsed in 1972 amid Catholic demands for reform. What had been peaceful protest was overtaken by a vicious IRA campaign and loyalist terrorism which would last for three decades known as the Troubles. In the end the IRA laid down its weapons without having achieved its main goal: Irish unity. Instead, Sinn Fein joined the government. That violence has returned and the province’s future seems once more uncertain is in large part the consequence of the decision by the DUP, unionism's dominant party, to back Brexit. It took the decision lightly—partly for reasons of party management—in the expectation that Remain would win. A freakish Westminster election result, in the wake of the Leave victory, gave its ten MPs unprecedented influence. Drunk with power, the party rejected former prime minister Theresa May’s plan for a soft Brexit, which would have avoided the creation of a border between Britain and Ireland. Instead, it backed Boris Johnson, whose vision of a hard Brexit necessitated the creation of such a border. But where should it be? Mr Johnson promised that it would not be between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, but neither London, Dublin nor Brussels would accept a withdrawal agreement that included a hard border on the island of Ireland. So within three months, Mr Johnson betrayed the DUP and created that Irish Sea border. Now the UK has been symbolically and economically divided. Northern Ireland effectively has remained in the EU’s single market and customs union while Great Britain has left. That has meant practical difficulties—online UK retailers refusing to sell to Northern Ireland, a ban on plants in British soil crossing the Irish Sea, and mountains of red tape. The Irish Sea border is thus accelerating the creation of an all-island economy. Jim Allister, who as leader of the Traditional Unionist Voice party is the voice of unbending unionism, regards this as creeping unification. He points out that Europe began with economic union, and political union followed. The GFA provides a road-map for the next stage, for it mandates a “border poll”—a referendum—if the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland believes a majority would vote for Irish unity. Dismayed by this and other developments, some loyalists have taken to the streets. There was a week of rioting in Belfast and other towns earlier this month. Prince Philip’s death quelled the violence, for the unionists are staunch monarchists; but the respite may be only temporary. There is little sympathy now for the DUP’s predicament. Their stance alienated people like Sara Canning, born into a republican family but freed by peace to question old orthodoxies. Her girlfriend, a young journalist named Lyra McKee, was murdered by a dissident republican gunman in 2019—a reminder that peace is relative, recent and fragile. Ms Canning had become a “small ‘u’ unionist” who felt that “Northern Ireland is like nobody’s child—nobody wants us. We’re a drain. But at least the UK can afford us.” Since Brexit she is open to whoever can make the best argument for prosperity and stability. Another Catholic questioning received wisdom was Eugene O’Neill, a priest in north Belfast. Before Brexit, he said publicly that Irish unity was “literally irrelevant” to any priest under the age of 45, but his views have changed. “Brexit has had a strange effect of rattling things that I felt had become our foundations.” Although he says nationalism is in his DNA, he describes the possibility of a referendum on reunification not as exhilarating, but as “very unsettling for me as someone who values societal stability”. Archbishop John McDowell, leader of the Church of Ireland, a Protestant church that is part of the Anglican Communion, says that despite Northern Ireland having a devolved government, “the place is beginning to feel like a colony again”, with the imposition from outside of policies on the basis that “you won’t do it yourself, so we’ll do it to you—it’s a wee bit like China and Hong Kong”. Northern Ireland seems to be “a stone in the shoe” of a Britain where English nationalism is on the rise, he said. Unionism’s loss is nationalism’s gain. John Finucane, a Sinn Fein MP, says unity is “probably as close as I’ve ever experienced it in my lifetime”, but accepts that memories of IRA atrocities mean some unionists will always oppose it. He wants unionism to “sell” its vision for the province so that there can be a proper debate about its future. Colum Eastwood, leader of the nationalist SDLP, makes a similar argument, but does not think unionism has much future. “This is only going in one direction. Frankly, I think the United Kingdom is coming to an end and Scotland will be out the door before us.” But he is not pressing for an immediate referendum. Nationalist parties do not have a detailed proposition for voters, he admits: “We’re holding our hands up and saying we haven’t done the work.” Intense attention is now being paid to reunification in the south, which over recent decades has been transformed from a quasi-theocracy and the poor part of the island into a prosperous and socially liberal democracy. Last month Leo Varadkar, a former Taoiseach, warned that unity will not mean bolting on the north but creating an entirely new county with all that entails, from the flag to the constitution. Some in Dublin fret about a narrow vote to reunify, leaving a million recalcitrant unionists in a state they oppose. Polls show strong support for unity in the south, but it diminishes if there is a big price tag. Will abandonment by Westminster see unionists give up on the union? It’s unlikely. Today’s burning unionist sense of betrayal by Tory politicians has historical resonance. No one more fully embodied Ulster unionists’ militant defiance than Edward Carson, whose bronze statue dominates the approach to Stormont. Yet in 1921, Lord Carson lamented in the House of Lords that Ulster “has stuck too well to you, and you believe that because she is loyal you can kick her as you like”. ■ Dig deeper From United Kingdom to Untied Kingdom (Apr 2021) Brexit has reinvigorated Scottish nationalism (Apr 2021)