Philip Roth. By Blake Bailey. W.W. Norton; 912 pages; $40. Jonathan Cape; £30 PHILIP ROTH insisted he wasn’t a Jewish novelist. This was a strange protestation for an author whose subjects include overbearing Jewish parents and rebellious sons, circumcision, the Holocaust, anti-Semitism and the diasporic condition (as well as unexpected uses for kosher liver). Nor, he maintained, was he an autobiographical one. Yet from first to last, Roth’s stories circle back to the corner of New Jersey where he grew up. He spent years trying to find a fictional form in which to analyse his combustible first marriage. Unusually, he once apologised for secretly recording a former lover on the phone and inserting her memories word for word into “The Human Stain”. Even when writing “The Plot Against America”, which imagines Charles Lindbergh’s election as president and the subsequent persecution of the Jews, Roth murmured to himself “Don’t invent, just remember.” As Blake Bailey’s new biography shows, Roth (who died in 2018) took great pains to manage his reputation. He facilitated sympathetic reviews and tore strips off his publishers for dud jacket copy. He pre-scripted interviews with Ross Miller, a previously anointed biographer whom he later disowned. When Wikipedia misidentified the origins of one of his characters, he responded in the New Yorker. He emerged almost fully formed from a coddled upbringing in a petit-bourgeois household in Newark. Early stories were published in all the right places. “Goodbye, Columbus”, his first collection, won the National Book Award; his advances were healthy, even before the succès de scandaleof “Portnoy’s Complaint” in 1969. That book set him up for life. He became a martyr to his craft in the secluded Connecticut countryside, with no family to distract him and no need to support himself by teaching—though on occasion he did, because campuses helped drag him out of a funk, and offered abundant supplies of female graduate students. During basic training he had hurt his back while dropping a pan of potatoes, and writing was a torture, physically and psychologically. One of his writerly commandments to his acolytes read: “It’s not going to get better. Resign yourself to this.” Yet he punished himself at his desk every day. The mix of monomaniacal devotion, incontestable achievement and daily humiliation helps explain why a younger generation of novelists, whose writing life was more precarious, saw him as the suffering servant of American literature. As peers such as Saul Bellow, John Updike and Norman Mailer drifted into senescence or died, he was the exemplar and redeemer. Such a life risks seeming drab, especially since Mr Bailey makes little attempt to explore the painstaking genesis of the novels. But Roth’s compulsive self-sabotage makes the story more dramatic than it might have been. He married twice, both times disastrously. The first union, with Margaret Martinson, came about after she faked a positive pregnancy test by using another woman’s urine. In Shakespearean comedy, bed tricks lead to happy endings. In this case it merely prolonged the hysteria, turmoil and infidelity and led to crushingly expensive litigation—cut short only by Margaret’s death in a car crash. Roth was so stunned by this deus ex machina that he asked his lawyer whether “this meant he was divorced in the state of New York”. A second marriage, to the actor Claire Bloom, was equally ill-starred. Roth cheated relentlessly and had a breakdown. Ms Bloom published a memoir accusing him of spousal abuse. It is impossible to apportion blame amid the sniping. Depending on tastes, the funny, angry work itself reached a peak in either the malicious glee of “Sabbath’s Theatre” or the tragic sonorities of “American Pastoral”. But one of Roth’s great themes—the complex business of assimilation—seems out of joint with today’s proudly intersectional times. His treatment of women, often callous, became frankly transactional in old age. Mr Bailey’s defence of him against charges of misogyny can be reduced to the plea that some of his best friends were women. Roth wrote two novels about the McCarthyite origins and incubation in academia of what is now called cancel culture. He may yet fall victim to it. ■