THE WORLD might look different had a wealthy teenager not died of typhoid fever in Florence in 1884. An avid collector of curios, Leland Stanford junior was 15 and on his second European tour when tragedy struck, depriving his parents of their only child. To honour him, a year later they founded what would become one of the world’s best universities. Without Leland Stanford Junior University in Palo Alto, California, there might be no Silicon Valley, nor the revolutions it has fostered in work and life, observes Mark Dion, an artist commissioned to commemorate this dramatic sequence of events. A single death helped beget a whole new age. Mr Dion is known for probing the ways natural and human history are presented in institutions. His installation at the Cantor Arts Centre at Stanford is a Wunderkammer stuffed with objects that illustrate the university’s origin story. The centrepiece is a huge Victorian “mourning cabinet” containing part of Leland junior’s childhood collection, complete with a portrait of the lost boy. But the exhibition, called “The Melancholy Museum” and now re-opened after a covid-induced hiatus, also tells other tales—about the Gold Rush, the Gilded Age and the labour that underpinned the Stanfords’ vast wealth. The young, doomed Stanford enjoyed all the privileges of the very rich, and used them to fill a private museum at the family mansion in San Francisco that he started at the age of 14. His curiosity extended to the birds he shot and stuffed; Native American mortars and pestles that workers dug up on the Stanford estate in Palo Alto; toy boats and carriages; weapons and armour and battlefield relics. The Tiffany Company gave him a case of paste replicas of the Koh-i-Noor and other famous diamonds. Part shrine, part eccentric display, the cabinet is a powerful embodiment of the acute grief of Jane Stanford, Leland junior’s mother. She was determined to immortalise her son by founding not just a university but also what was then the world’s largest private museum, originally to house his miscellany. After his death, Leland Stanford senior reportedly said that “the children of California will be my children.” In collaboration with Stanford students, Mr Dion picked 700 objects from the family’s hoard, out of some 6,000 that survived the two earthquakes to strike the museum in the 20th century. He balances this quirky abundance with a roomful of items that allude to the sources of the Stanford fortune. They include a broken shovel and a dynamite plunger; the “Golden Spike” that symbolically united the two halves of the transcontinental railroad, constructed by Chinese workers; and pay slips from labourers on the Palo Alto estate and horse-breeding farm. The room is a reminder that, before he became a railroad baron, the elder Leland Stanford made his money not in gold, but by selling the tools that goldminers used—just as some of today’s tech tycoons made their billions not in glitzy goods but internet routers and databases. The objects are mute; the installation is an artwork, says Mr Dion, not a lecture. But it spurs the visitor to ask more questions—as if Stanford’s history, like all history, were an ornate cabinet with compartments begging to be opened, revealing a more nuanced truth. ■