The Story of Work. By Jan Lucassen. Yale University Press; 544 pages; $30 and £25 OF THE MANY habits and institutions on which covid-19 has shone a harsh light, none has been more exposed and disrupted than work. The pandemic has drawn attention to the disjuncture between the indispensability of certain jobs, from nursing to making deliveries, and how little they tend to pay. It left many workers bewilderingly idle, or stuck at a disorienting remove from their colleagues. Having downed their usual tools, the bored often took up Neolithic habits, like growing food or baking bread—ironically, given that it was the turn to agriculture, beginning some 12,000 years ago, which first set humankind on the path towards arduous work in dense cities, through which zoonotic diseases might one day run rampant. “The Story of Work” by Jan Lucassen, a scholar at the International Institute of Social History in Amsterdam, chronicles the long-term background to these jarring developments. The narrative begins with the hunting-and-gathering past, which accounts for most of humankind’s time as a distinct species. Hunter-gatherer life is often portrayed as Edenic. In fact, early societies could be violent, people often died young, and few enjoyed a leisurely existence—as the Cuiva do in South America today, reputedly spending up to 16 hours a day in their hammocks. Nevertheless, this ancient way of life retains an undeniable appeal. Work among hunting-gathering bands was co-operative, social and highly varied; members were masters of many skills, rather than specialists in just a few. Social inequality of any sort scarcely existed. The business of obtaining food generally occupied fewer hours than a modern full-time job, though work included other tasks as well, such as the collective raising of children, the fashioning and repair of tools and the fulfilment of social obligations that fostered group cohesion. In as much as the hunting-gathering life is humankind’s natural state, it is one in which work is rewarding and meaningful, community is central and fairness matters. Just as hunter-gatherer society is often characterised as idyllic, the adoption of settled agriculture is frequently presented as the moment when everything went wrong. This, too, is misleading. For one thing, it was not a moment at all; the progression from the first turn towards dependence on domesticated plants and animals, to the production of surpluses big enough to support cities, took some 5,000 years. Agriculture did not immediately lead to patriarchy or drastic inequality. Rather, the road to class divisions ran through millennia of “transegalitarian” societies, in which some people or households controlled a larger share of a community’s output, but did not necessarily take ownership of the means of production. In early urban economies, producers surrendered their output to a central authority—usually a temple—which reallocated goods to community members. Yet as people learned to wring more output from the land, they built the basis of modern human existence, with all its advantages and drawbacks. Surpluses freed ever more individuals from a hard life producing food. Professions began to emerge—beginning with the odd soldier or smith but widening to include an entire menagerie of artisans and functionaries. From around 7,000 years ago the first great cities arose, in Mesopotamia and then South and East Asia. And as societies grew in size and complexity, new working arrangements appeared, from unfree servitude to self-employment and, crucially, wage labour. This last category expanded with the rise of the first states and their armies; soldiers were among the first working people to earn a money wage. Wage labour and standardised, low-denomination coinage combined to produce economic magic, as true markets began to operate. Not only did these allow commerce to flourish, but by granting the freedom to choose when and how to earn a living, a marketplace for work may also have helped kindle a more individualistic outlook than other arrangements encouraged. Progress brought complications. Warlike and patriarchal societies—such as the Yamnaya of the Eurasian steppe, pastoral nomads who violently displaced matriarchal and egalitarian communities in Europe and South Asia from roughly 5,000 years ago—upended old norms and sowed the seeds of many modern ills. States harnessed the labour of the masses in the construction of grand projects, from mausoleums to aqueducts, and in the destruction of rival civilisations. Within and across societies, the powerful exploited the powerless. Whereas traditional histories often present drudges and slaves as anonymous extras in the dramas of luminaries, passive in the face of their unhappy fates, Mr Lucassen affords them attention and agency. Africans waylaid by slavers often resisted to the death, he notes. In 1785 captives placed aboard the Dutch ship Neptunus rebelled and lit the gunpowder in its hold, preferring to kill themselves and their assailants than to submit to the lash. If economic injustice is perennial, so is dissatisfaction and resistance to it. Throughout history, elites have deployed cosmologies, from ancient religions to modern political philosophies, in a bid to legitimise inequalities. Even so, vast differences inevitably prompt backlashes: from the first known strike action, in the 12th century BC in the village of Deir el-Medina in Egypt—which housed artisans gathered to work in the Valley of the Kings—to modern trade unionism and the political unrest sparked by globalisation and mechanisation. Indeed, the most powerful impression left by “The Story of Work” is of continuity. The Industrial Revolution brought a decisive break in the capacity to increase economic output. But the forces that made it possible—specialisation and trade, expansion of markets, intensification of production—are age-old. So is the motivating power of the desire for more, from the Neolithic enthusiasm for precious stones, which gave a spur to the making of tools; to the “industrious revolution” of the centuries before industrialisation, in which an appetite for new consumer goods drove increased participation in labour markets among both men and women; to the modern-day cult of the side hustle. In the end the long perspective that the book provides is a mixed blessing. These days it is tempting to imagine that new technologies might mean a chance for workers to recapture the more appealing aspects of the prehistoric past. Were machines eventually able to handle all the world’s unpleasant tasks, people could spend more time on activities that they find meaningful, or in engagement with their communities, a benign possibility that Mr Lucassen considers. Already, as he points out, in the 20th century many countries constructed generous welfare states, the length of the working week declined from 19th-century highs, and the share of life spent in a relatively workless retirement soared. And yet his history also shows how much today’s workers have in common with every other soul who has toiled these past 12,000 years. They remain at the mercy of their appetites, and of political and economic institutions built, often consensually, to help them produce more. As it always has, work still provides a structure for both individual lives and societies at large. Little wonder that many people have been itching to get back to it as quickly as circumstances allow. ■