Voyagers: The Settlement of the Pacific. By Nicholas Thomas. Basic Books; 224 pages; $25. Apollo; £18.99 I N 1686 WILLIAM DAMPIER, an English pirate with an unlikely literary flair and an appetite for scientific and human observation, anchored the Cygnet off the coast of Guam, an island in what is now known as the Micronesia region of the western Pacific Ocean. He was profoundly impressed by the Chamorro people he encountered there, in particular by their voyaging canoes, which were unlike any craft he knew. “The Natives”, he wrote in his account of the visit, “are very ingenious beyond any people, in making Boats, or Proes”, now known as proas. “These are built sharp at both ends; the bottom is of one piece…very neatly dug, and left of a good substance.” Dampier went on to describe “the little boat”, that is, the vessel’s outrigger, meant “to keep the great Boat upright from oversetting”. These twin-hulled vessels in effect reversed direction to pass through the eye of the wind—unlike any European or American craft. They were also supremely swift. “I do believe”, Dampier concluded of the islanders, “they sail the best of any Boats in the World.” Dampier’s voyage came roughly midway between the European discovery of Guam, 500 years ago this year, by Ferdinand Magellan, during the Portuguese explorer’s circumnavigation of the world, and the extraordinary Pacific voyages of Captain James Cook between 1768 and 1780. Magellan’s stumbling upon Guam as a trans-ocean way-station between continents in effect launched the global age. On board Cook’s cruises through the vast region of scattered atolls, archipelagoes and “high” islands, today called Oceania, were some of Europe’s finest natural philosophers and artists, eagerly recording everything they saw or experienced. But Cook’s mission was also an imperialising one. His voyages were way-stations of a kind, towards Oceania’s formal colonisation; the enslavement and kidnapping of islanders for work elsewhere; the plundering of natural resources, from whaling to mining; the ravaging effects of imported diseases on island communities; and the transformation of the Pacific Ocean into an arena for global conflict. After the second world war, the atolls were used as sites for nuclear tests. Today some island nations are acutely vulnerable to climate change and rising sea levels, wider forces once again intruding roughly on Pacific lives. From a world-historical perspective, then, the Pacific is much less remote than outsiders make it out to be. When the story of this watery crucible is told, modern island thinkers understandably tire of the prominence often given to Cook and other Europeans. But as Nicholas Thomas, an Australian historian and anthropologist at the University of Cambridge, highlights in his concise new book, some of the questions that Cook and his companions asked remain pertinent, for islanders above all. Who were these extraordinary people who first reached specks of land across an ocean that covers a third of the Earth? Where did they come from? A new inquiry might be added to those old ones: where, in a figurative sense, are Pacific islanders now heading? From a surprisingly early date, Mr Thomas argues, islanders themselves have collaborated with outsiders in the search for answers. Tupaia, a navigator and priest from the Society Islands (today part of French Polynesia), seized the chance to join Cook on his departure from Tahiti. A chart Tupaia produced has become a symbol of cross-cultural encounter in the Pacific. As well as navigation, he shared knowledge of Polynesian customs and history. He acted as a go-between in Cook’s first meetings with the Maori of New Zealand, whose tattoos were similar to those of the Polynesians of Tahiti. They welcomed him as a tohunga, or learned man, and conversed with him in a shared tongue. Had Tupaia survived the journey to England rather than dying in Batavia (modern Jakarta), he might have shared much more. The quest for origins has been complicated by the size of the Pacific region, and environments that are not often conducive to preserving the archaeological record. The earliest voyaging craft lacked iron fastenings, and no traces of them survive. Yet the author highlights a dizzying burst of new research that draws on advanced genetics, linguistics and, not least, a revival of voyaging itself by indigenous navigators. Some lineaments of the past are now incontrovertible. Whereas the ancestors of the Chamorro people settled western Micronesia from the Philippines, today’s Polynesians are descended from the Lapita people, named after their distinctive pottery. The Lapita moved through archipelagic South-East Asia from Taiwan and, a little over 3,000 years ago, launched into the Pacific from the easternmost tip of what is today Papua New Guinea. These could not have been accidental voyages, made, for example, by coastal fishermen blown offshore. The craft setting off for new lands must have carried women, yams for cultivation and the pandanus tree for making rope and sails, plus dogs, pigs and chickens. What is more, vessels sailed by the same peoples plied back in the opposite direction too—not least, the sweet potato, native to South America, was brought westward across the Pacific. Modern islanders have built traditional sailing craft and shown how it might be done (see picture). Eschewing compasses, like their forebears they use the stars, clouds, drifting seaweed, the flights of birds and even the smell of the air and ocean as navigational tools, overlaid by mental maps that were passed down the generations. In his book “We, the Navigators” the late David Lewis, a doctor and sailor from New Zealand, recounted how local navigators rested their testicles on the hull to gauge the pattern of the swells. Such modern seafarers have mirrored the astounding voyages of their ancestors, including between Hawaii, Tahiti and New Zealand, making their landfalls with uncanny accuracy. Other answers, however, remain tantalisingly out of reach. In the longue durée  of human history, Mr Thomas writes, Pacific settlers “expanded their range almost suddenly”, in two rapid waves. The first was to western Polynesia, and the second, a millennium ago, into central and eastern Polynesia. Very little long-distance settlement seems to have taken place in between. Since population pressures do not appear to have been a major push factor, the motivation of the settlers remains one of the great enigmas of history. Perhaps the founders of new communities gained great mana, or spiritual power, from launching out into the unknown, while their descendants secured high status. The revival in voyaging is of a piece with an awakened sense of Pacific identity, in which a view of the island states as minuscule and impoverished is replaced with something broader, a cosmopolitan character defined by the vast sea. Capturing this gathering pride, the late Fijian-Tongan author Epeli Hau’ofa invoked “the ocean in us”. Its waters are a fluid metaphor for separation, loss and grief for all those voyagers who never returned. Water is also central to Oceania’s myths of origin and returning—and to both a new sense of environmental danger and a revived desire among Pacific islanders to connect. ■