IN 1989 DAVID MAISEL, an American photographer, took his first aerial images of the Berkeley Pit. The copper mine outside Butte, Montana, was operational between 1955 and 1982 and is the largest site of contaminated land in America. Some pictures clearly depicted the aftermath of decades of open-pit mining, the earth scarred with undulating trenches. Others were abstract and beautiful, painterly in their mastery of composition and colour. The portfolio that resulted, from Arizona and Nevada as well as Montana and called “The Mining Project” (pictured), was the start of a preoccupation with landscapes “that have been transformed by human activity—negatively transformed, even eradicated,” Mr Maisel says. The Berkeley Pit was also familiar to Peter Koch, a book artist and printer who grew up in Missoula, Montana. He knew that 2021 was forecast to be the year in which acid- and arsenic-laden water seeping into the Pit might rise high enough to contaminate groundwater and streams that feed the Columbia river, the major waterway of the Pacific Northwest. Since then, new pumping and treatment systems have kept the waters stable. But by 2017 Mr Koch and the late Edwin Dobb, a Butte native and journalist, had already dreamed up a plan to “raise a ruckus” by convening artists to sound the environmental alarm. “Extraction: Art on the Edge of the Abyss” is an unprecedented effort by artists to address such ecological nightmares. Though conceived in the American West, the initiative includes artists from across the world; their work is on view at some 60 museums and galleries across America, Britain and Canada. “The environmental lawyers, the engineers and scientists and politicians have failed” to address environmental devastation, says Mr Koch boldly. “Our only hope is the artists.” Painters and poets, ceramicists and essayists, dancers, singers and visual and conceptual artists all lend their perspectives to the exhibits as well as a comprehensive catalogue. Yet it is photography that reaches deeper into the human psyche than any other art form when it comes to revealing industrial irresponsibility, according to Mr Dobb, who died after helping launch the project. America’s leading landscape photographers are well-represented, including Richard Misrach, Michael Light and Garth Lenz. Yet as Mr Maisel’s work shows, not all photographs of extractive industries need be purely representational to be effective. Many of Mr Maisel’s images are strikingly beautiful, while at the same time disturbing to the viewer who recognises the subjects they depict. Some resemble colour-field paintings, others thick swirls of impasto. “I want to make a picture that stays in the mind’s eye, even if you don’t know what it is—and maybe that inspires you to ask questions,” the artist says. “Beauty can be a sharp and effective tool.” His most recent work, “Desolation Desert” (pictured above), includes a series of photos of a lithium mine in the Atacama desert in Chile. Lime-green processing pools are lined up eerily, like lozenges or lurid tiles. These are the source of the lithium in smartphones and “green solutions” like electric batteries for cars, Mr Maisel notes, despoiling one of the most fragile high-altitude deserts on the planet. The issues and trade-offs are complex. Mr Maisel’s own photography depends heavily on minerals and fossil fuels, too. The painful truth, he says, is that “we are all embedded in [this system]. It’s how we live our lives.” If the aim of his art—and the “Extraction” project writ large—is to provoke questions, then the most pressing is how to scale back the appetites that require such “suicidal consumption of the planet’s natural resources,” in Mr Dobb’s words. When it comes to climate change and species and habitat destruction, it is clear that science and reason are not getting through to enough people, writes Michael Traynor, a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in an essay in the catalogue. The creative arts offer a different kind of communication, one that is “more heart-based” than fact-based in its persuasiveness, says Mr Maisel. Hundreds of artists are participating in “Extraction”; each approaches the task differently. At a show called “Fire and Ice”, opening in September at Connecticut College, Zaria Forman captures the world’s receding glaciers in breathtaking photorealistic pastels. Basia Irland addresses a similar subject: using water from melting glaciers or tainted sources around the world, she has made books out of ice embedded with rows of seeds, locking hope inside the frozen blocks. Christopher Volpe paints with tar to create visceral canvasses suggesting the industrial domination of nature. “Artists are morally and ethically called on to imagine alternative ways and worlds,” reckons Mr Koch, whose own books are on display at his printing office in Berkeley, California. At a time of existential crisis, it is the role of artists not only to bear witness, he says, but insist that humankind take responsibility for what it has done. A list of exhibits and participants in “Extraction: Art at the Edge of the Abyss” is at www.extractionart.org. “Apocalyptic/Sublime”, an online exhibition of the photographs of David Maisel, can be viewed via the Haines Gallery, San Francisco