LIKE MANY masters of the craft, Naseeruddin Saami took up singing when he was a child. His family, which moved from Delhi to Karachi in the wake of the Partition of India, included several qawwals (performers of devotional Sufi music), and they encouraged an appreciation of the art. At the age of 11 he was placed under the tutelage of his uncle, Munshi Raziuddin, a renowned musician and scholar, and became steeped in the classical genre of khyal. He left school at 15 and began spending as many as 16 hours a day singing. More than 60 years later, Mr Saami continues to wake up at four o’clock in the morning to practise; he may have earned the title of ustaad (master), but he still considers himself to be a student. As the only person known to be able to sing all the notes in the microtonal scale, it is believed that Mr Saami is the last in a musical lineage that stretches back to the 13th century. Whereas the Western musical mode consists of seven notes, repeated at the octave, Mr Saami is able to produce 49 notes and minute, precise pitches. “I can’t say that this voice is ‘mine’,” he says, dismissing the idea of individual talent. “I’m a fakir [ascetic], a mere carrier of a gift given to me by the divine and transmitted to me through my teacher.” Mr Saami’s music brings together two forms—qawwali and khyal—both attributed to Amir Khusrau, a 13th-century Indo-Persian singer and poet. Qawwali is poetry set to music, while khyal works with sound alone, explains Mr Saami. The songs have been performed for hundreds of years, but musicians often add their own improvisation; as well as having meticulous control over their voice, a khyal singer has to have “intuitive knowledge” of when a note should be used. “Sound is the beginning of the universe itself,” the musician says, with an expression of wonderment as he talks about the sacred qualities of his music. “Allah said kun [be] and the universe came into being. That is its power.” Mr Saami’s work has long been popular with classical-music aficionados in Pakistan, yet he has gained a wider international audience of late, first through “Closer to God”, a documentary by Annette Berger, which had its premiere in 2018, and then through the release of an album. Two of Mr Saami’s students had written to Ian Brennan, a Grammy-award-winning producer, imploring him to meet the musician and document this endangered skill. When Mr Brennan flew to Karachi, they recorded much of the work in a week. The result, “God Is Not A Terrorist”, was released in 2019. The six tracks on the record date back to Khusrau; the album’s title summarises Mr Saami’s intention for the work—to offer a more nuanced view of Pakistan. Mr Brennan remembers being awed by the complexity of Mr Saami’s art: “I feel like he transcends musical forms in the same way Luciano Pavarotti was able to transcend the opera,” he says. “I think the only person who truthfully understands what he does is him. He hits notes that only he knows, and no one else knows. He is the master.” The producer recalls a particular performance by Mr Saami at WOMAD, a festival in Wiltshire, England. He came on stage at midnight and performed one song for an hour. The 10,000-strong crowd was moved, he says: “People in the audience were weeping as they listened to him. The way he does these microtones, it begins to reflect in your body if you really listen to it. You can start feeling as if changes are happening inside—neurologically and physiologically.” Mr Saami has many students, his sons among them, who hope to grasp the art of the microtone under his instruction. He is confident that this storied musical lineage will continue. “This is knowledge that has lasted over 700 years,” he says. “It reached me in some way and I’m certain that it will not die. God will place it in the hearts of who he wants to.”