Three Rooms. By Jo Hamya. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; 208 pages; $25. Jonathan Cape; £12.99 VIRGINIA WOOLF reckoned that a woman needed money and a room of her own if she were to write fiction. The nameless female narrator of Jo Hamya’s debut novel aspires to more living space, but for more prosaic reasons: the “end goal I wanted, through any job necessary, was to be able to afford a flat, not just a room, and then to settle in it and invite friends to dinner”. Over a fraught year involving precarious employment, low wages and rented digs, she becomes painfully aware that her modest dream might be unattainable. The story begins in autumn 2018, when the narrator arrives in Oxford to start a nine-month contract as a post-doctoral research assistant. She moves into a “borrowed room” in a university-owned house and spends her days working and wandering the city. She knows that she has come far—“you are a woman, you are brown, you have made it here”—yet despite her efforts to fit in, she feels like an outsider. She doesn’t fare much better when she swaps Oxford for London and academia for a “real-world job”. Once again she has no permanent work or fixed abode, just a stranger’s sofa and a short-term gig as a copy editor on a society magazine. She finds herself sidelined by colleagues, scorned by her flatmate and increasingly anxious about her dwindling resources and vanishing prospects. When her contract is not renewed, and she outstays her welcome as a lodger, she moves into her third room—in her parents’ home outside the capital. Now she feels defeated, but lowering her expectations and re-evaluating her plans may be her only chance to advance. “Three Rooms” exhibits some of the excesses typical of debuts. The narrator’s reflections can border on navel-gazing; her fascination with a glamorous Oxford student becomes tiresome. Nevertheless, the novel evolves into an intelligent, original examination of privilege and belonging in 21st-century England. Its account of thwarted progress proves absorbing, enriched as it is by shrewd observations and insightful meditations on the trials of modern life and the state of the nation. And the narrator’s candour is refreshing. Acquaintances highlight the ironies of ambitions like hers, as when her flatmate asks her: “Don’t you think it’s weird that you spent a year giving yourself to the place that started the careers of people that openly disdain you, and now you’ve gone to work for a publication that exalts them?” This is a nuanced portrait of a woman’s search for stability and an adult identity in an obstacle-strewn world.