The Key Man. By Simon Clark and Will Louch. Harper Business; 352 pages; $29.99. Penguin Business; £20 AT THE HEIGHT of his success, Arif Naqvi liked to remind colleagues that “Today’s peacock is tomorrow’s feather duster.” That ended up being an apt description of his own fate. As head of the Abraaj Group, the Pakistan-born financier spread his wings and attracted billions of dollars from global investors, only to end up being plucked by prosecutors as the alleged perpetrator of one of the largest corporate frauds in history—charges he denies. Abraaj never became a household name. In its heyday in the mid-2010s, however, it claimed to be the world’s largest private-equity group focused on emerging markets. Within a decade of founding the firm in 2002, Mr Naqvi had earned a reputation as a swashbuckling empire-builder, propelled by cheeky deals and a talent for self-promotion; he was one of Davos’s keenest flesh-pressers. He burnished his image with bursts of philanthropy. At one point he was even tipped as a future prime minister of Pakistan. For the investors needed to plump up Abraaj’s private-equity funds, the biggest attraction was that Mr Naqvi seemed to be a master of “impact investing”, according to “The Key Man”, an account of his rise and fall by Simon Clark and Will Louch of the Wall Street Journal. This more caring form of capitalism, which involves trying to make a profit and do good at the same time, was right for the era. Mr Naqvi “was sought out by billionaires and their millennial heirs who enthusiastically adopted the idea of impact investing and the feel-good veneer it gave to the old game of making money”. Among those who invested in Abraaj’s funds were the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the World Bank, and Western and Middle Eastern governments. Academics and journalists lapped it up, too. A prominent Harvard professor became a cheerleader for Abraaj. Institutional Investor, an industry publication, crowned Mr Naqvi “The Gulf’s Buy-out King”. (The firm’s headquarters were in Dubai, a fitting base given the emirate’s reputation as a freewheeling financial centre.) The seeds of Abraaj’s downfall, say the authors, were the breakneck expansion of the business and Mr Naqvi’s increasingly lavish lifestyle, which left the firm struggling to cover its costs, including salaries. To keep things going, Mr Naqvi and some of his lieutenants allegedly started to sweep more and more of the available cash in Abraaj’s funds into secret bank accounts that they controlled, thereby breaking a cardinal rule of asset management: that investors’ funds should never be commingled with the firm’s own money. The more investors’ cash was diverted in this way, says the book, the more elaborate was the extra financial juggling required to make it look to them and the rest of the outside world as if nothing was awry. The strain appears to have pushed Mr Naqvi’s finance chief, a pious Pakistani accountant, to the edge of a nervous breakdown. The alleged jiggery-pokery began to unravel when the Gates Foundation noticed discrepancies in a health-care fund it had invested in. Whistleblowers came forward; investigations were launched. Abraaj collapsed into liquidation. American prosecutors have charged Mr Naqvi with running a criminal enterprise that “corrupted” Abraaj between 2014 and 2018. He faces a long jail sentence if convicted. Having lost his battle against extradition, he is in effect under house arrest in London on £15m ($20.7m) bail—a British record—while he appeals. In 2019 a former senior Abraaj executive pleaded guilty in New York to fraud and racketeering. Later that year Mr Naqvi himself was convicted of fraud in the United Arab Emirates, and sentenced to three years in prison, over loans from an airline allegedly used to plug a gap in Abraaj’s accounts. “The Key Man” is impeccably researched and sumptuous in its detail. But sometimes the authors are too keen to share everything they have gleaned—for instance, in pages and pages on the takeover of an electrical utility in Pakistan, or on Mr Naqvi’s bail hearings. A jump back in time for a long description of the Gates Foundation’s early involvement with Abraaj, just as things were getting really tense in 2016, is peculiar. The book would have been better without such diversions, at two-thirds the length. For the most part, though, it is a page-turner, built around a riveting portrait of the key man of the title. Mr Naqvi comes across as a teeming mass of contradictions: a charming and generous figure who inspired great loyalty, but was also bullying and self-important. “He talked about his love for democracy but his employees experienced a dictatorship,” the authors conclude. He told anyone who would listen that he was on the board of Interpol, when his role was actually at a foundation linked to it. He liked to compare himself to heroes from history, real and imagined, from Moses to Sinbad. The book is also a timely reminder that it is when financial firms offer services that seem to suit the zeitgeist, and grow rapidly as a result, that scrutiny of them is most needed. The list of those too mesmerised by Abraaj’s profit-with-purpose mantra to ask serious questions is uncomfortably long. With money, as with missiles, trust but verify. ■