ON JUNE 12TH The Economist’s pages featured an activist investor “honing in on the dearth of energy experience” on a company’s board. A few readers honed in on a solecism: the original phrase is to “home in” on something, like the creatures that find their way back to their nests—that is, they “home”—with surprising precision. Yet according to Google Books, “honed in on” is about three-quarters as common in published works as “homed in on”. Merriam-Webster, a dictionary publisher, considers “hone in” an established variant, even if “home in” is better (by virtue of being older, and so less likely to attract censure). What makes “hone in” so tempting? In 2003 the linguists behind the Language Log blog coined the term “eggcorn” for a particular kind of mishearing of a word or phrase. There are other varieties of mishearings, but they are not eggcorns. A “mondegreen” is a nonsensical one, often of a song lyric. An elegiac tune with the line “and laid him on the green” was heard as “and Lady Mondegreen”, giving the phenomenon its name. A website called KissThisGuy.com (from a mishearing of “excuse me while I kiss the sky”) collects others. A malapropism is another kind of misunderstanding—attempting to use a posh word but choosing a similar-sounding term instead. It was named after Mrs Malaprop, a character in Richard Brinsley Sheridan’s play “The Rivals” of 1775; she reached for refined words and inevitably found the wrong one, saying things like “the very pineapple of politeness” for “pinnacle”. The song “A Word a Day” from “Top Banana”, a musical, features malapropisms in reverse. The singer, quizzed on the meaning of “amphibious”, defines it as “someone who can use either hand”. The eggcorn, though, is more venerable. The word began as a misconstrual of “acorn”. Unlike a malapropism or mondegreen, the eggcorn has a logic that makes it alluring. Acorns and eggs have similar shapes, and both produce new life. Indeed, “acorn” may itself be an eggcorn; its original form, aecern, may have been gradually adapted by speakers who thought it was a kind of “corn”. Hence the popularity of “hone in”. To “home in on” something is to gradually approach a target. To “hone” a blade is to gradually make it more suitable to your purpose. The overlapping meanings make “hone in” a tempting swap. There are so many sensible-seeming alterations of this sort that Chris Waigl, a geophysicist in Alaska, has collected 648 of them in her online Eggcorn Database. Some eggcorns are especially enticing because they make more sense than the phrases they replace. Consider “death nail”, which is more plausible on its face than “death knell”. Nails go along with death (as in “nail in the coffin”), and some people may not know of any other kind of knell (originally the sound of a bell). The substitution of a rarely used word with an everyday equivalent is the hallmark of many eggcorns. For instance, linguists invented “code-switching” to describe the practice of moving back and forth between two languages or dialects, often in one conversation or even sentence. It is a fascinating phenomenon with a clumsy name. When a reviewer for the Toronto Star, writing about the black characters in the film “Moonlight”, described their “coat-switching”, he arguably improved it. So if you chuckle when you read “the point is mute”, “in one foul swoop” or “to change tact”, ask yourself whether you could give precise definitions of “moot”, “fell” or “tack”. The speakers replacing them with more common words are in a way the opposite of Mrs Malaprop; rather than trying to show off, they are often making opaque expressions simpler. George Orwell once mocked “tow the line” for “toe the line” in a passage about people who use metaphors without thinking about them. He was criticising those who write automatically, stitching platitudes together without reflection. His advice to avoid clichés is always salutary; his injunction to think about what the words you use really mean is an even better one. But his judgment here was a little too harsh. “Tow the line” was an eggcorn avant la lettre: if you obediently do your political party’s bidding, you might just as easily pull a rope at their command as you would stand on a mark they have made on the ground. The people who reach for this seemingly jumbled phrase are thinking—and coming up with an expression that is clearer to them than the original. Eggcorns are often a sign not of idiocy but of ingenuity.