CINEMA HAS a way of distilling and defining holidays: think of watching George Bailey’s travails in “It’s a Wonderful Life” (1946) at Christmas, or the rush to get home to family at Thanksgiving, as captured in “Planes, Trains and Automobiles” (1987). Some obscure holidays only exist in the national consciousness because of movies. How many people would know about Punxsutawney Phil if Bill Murray hadn’t got trapped in a time loop in Pennsylvania during “Groundhog Day” (1993)? It would be reasonable to assume that the American national holiday, the Fourth of July, provides the backdrop to any number of films, wherein characters gather for barbecues and fireworks to mark their country’s independence from Britain. The truth is a little more complicated. The most famous depiction of the summer festivities is in “Jaws” (1975), and an air of menace and greed looms over the patriotic celebrations. The local mayor keeps the beaches open for the weekend despite the threat of a shark attack; it would be a disaster for the local economy to have “a panic on our hands on the Fourth of July”. “Jaws” created the idea of the “summer blockbuster”, yoked to the very date it sends up. Steven Spielberg’s film was scheduled to be released in December, a prime spot in the studio calendar due to its proximity to Christmas and the Academy Awards. Delays in production—mainly caused by “Bruce”, the malfunctioning mechanical shark—pushed the release date back to late June. The film’s record-breaking success overturned conventional wisdom about the summertime lull. Two years later “Star Wars” would hit American cinemas on May 25th and smash the box-office record set by “Jaws”, cementing the change. Films such as “Back to the Future” (1985), “Terminator 2: Judgement Day” (1991), “Men in Black” (1997) and “Transformers” (2007) would all find success with releases on or around the Fourth of July. One which nailed its red, white and blue colours firmly to the mast was Roland Emmerich’s “Independence Day” (1996). The film had a limited release on July 2nd—the date on which the story actually begins—before expanding into more cinemas over the holiday weekend. (It made more than $96m in ticket sales in its first five days.)The tale of a worldwide alien invasion is a mix of disaster movie and feel-good heroics. Bill Pullman’s Kennedy-esque president gives a rousing speech in which he remodels the titular holiday into an international day of freedom: “And should we win the day, the Fourth of July will no longer be known as an American holiday, but as the day the world declared in one voice: ‘We will not go quietly into the night!’...Today we celebrate our Independence Day!” According to Tom Shone, a film critic and the author of “Blockbuster: How Hollywood Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Summer”, the line was not in the original script; it was inserted by the film-makers in an attempt to pressure studio executives to stick with the chosen title and release date. Warner Bros, a different studio, owned the rights to another title called “Independence Day” and 20th Century Fox hoped to call the film “ID4”.Four years later the German director returned with “The Patriot” (2000, pictured). The film stars two Australians, Mel Gibson and Heath Ledger, as a father-and-son pair drawn into the revolutionary war. Historical inaccuracies, violent heroics and flag-waving nationalism had proved a successful formula for Mr Gibson in “Braveheart” in 1995, but American (rather than Scottish) patriotism did not translate into huge box-office success in this case. And yet the lukewarm reception of “The Patriot” is consistent with the way Hollywood has failed to transform the actual historical events celebrated on the Fourth of July into compelling stories. Previously Hugh Hudson’s “Revolution” (1985) had been so damned by critics that it almost ended Al Pacino’s film career. It seems that the war of independence is box-office poison: perhaps the events are too familiar to Americans from school or are considered sacred in some way. Maybe studios, which increasingly look overseas for profits, these days think the holiday is too parochial. But “John Adams” (2008), an acclaimed mini-series, and “Hamilton”, the mega-hit musical, suggest there is a way to chronicle this period in a way that is fresh and engaging. Someone in Hollywood must be thinking they can do better than “The Patriot”—and if they do, the release date will be a no-brainer.