Since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic in early 2020 many have wondered when the world will return to “normal”. But whether things will ever go back to the way they were is unclear: remote working looks set to continue, for example, and going to the movies may never be as popular as it used to be. The Economist has devised a “normalcy index” to track how behaviour has changed, and continues to change, because of the pandemic. Our index comprises eight indicators, split into three domains. The first grouping is transport and travel: public transport in big cities; the amount of traffic congestion in those same cities; and the number of international and domestic flights. The second looks at recreation and entertainment: how much time is spent outside the home; cinema box-office revenues (a proxy measure for cinema attendance); and attendance at professional sports events. The third is retailing and work: footfall in shops; and occupancy of offices (measured by workplace footfall in big cities). Our index covers 50 of the world's largest economies that together account for 90% of global GDP and 76% of the world's population. Our aggregate measure is the population-weighted average of each country's score. The pre-pandemic level of activity is set at 100 for ease of comparison. The tracker is updated with new data once a week. The global normalcy index plummeted in March 2020 as many countries imposed draconian restrictions on their citizens. It fell to just 35 in April 2020, before improving gradually over the following months. Today it stands at 66, suggesting that the world has travelled roughly half of the way back to pre-pandemic life. Some indicators, such as traffic congestion and time spent outside, have recovered faster than others, particularly sports attendance and flights. The global average masks a lot of variation across countries. Click on the drop-down box to explore how behaviour has changed in each one. Activity is not back to normal in any of the countries we track. The reading for China briefly returned to pre-pandemic levels during its celebrations for the lunar new year in February—owing in part to record-breaking box-office receipts—but the country now has a middling rank. Hong Kong and New Zealand—two places that have implemented effective measures against the coronavirus and suffered relatively few deaths—are currently at the top of our table. Malaysia, which is suffering from a deadly wave of infections caused by the more transmissible Delta variant, sits at the bottom.  The two tables below show the change in the index over the past two weeks. India's score has increased the most, but from a very low level. South Africa has fallen the most after it announced new restrictions to quell a surge in infections.  Public transport has recovered strongly since the onset of the pandemic. Levels of traffic congestion have rebounded, too. Flights remain mostly grounded by government restrictions. When lockdowns were at their most stringent, in April 2020, time spent outside the home fell by 20% according to our global average. In contrast, the closure of cinemas and sports stadiums caused activity in those venues to fall to zero. They have been on a slow path to recovery since. Cinemas may never fully recover. Zoom meetings and Amazon deliveries have been two prominent features of the covid-19 pandemic. Most white-collar workers are betting on continued flexibility in how much time they spend in the workplace; office occupancy rates may never return to previous levels. But don't write off bricks and mortar: retail footfall has been remarkably strong since the middle of last year. Sources: afltables.com; baseball-freak.com; baseball-reference.com; Box Office Mojo; Google; hockey-reference.com; TomTom; pro-football-reference.com; UN ICAO; Transfermarkt; ultimatealeague.com; Wind; The Economist