“YOU HAVE to be prepared to lose,” I tell my son. Denmark has a good shot; they’ve beaten bigger teams and they are on a high, but England are too, and they’re at home. You can’t get into sport if you can’t take heartbreak, because winning doesn’t mean anything without the possibility of losing. Whatever happens, I say, Denmark has had a brilliant tournament, and we’re going to have a good time. My nine-year-old wasn’t used to the emotional crush of a big defeat. I thought that was the worst I needed to prepare him for. My wife is Danish and he is binational. I have adopted Denmark as my heart’s second home. But I grew up in the American south, where “football” means something else. In recent years my Georgia Bulldogs and Atlanta Falcons suffered two of the most stunning comeback losses in American football history in their national championships. Fandom hurts. On the quiet train from my south London neighborhood to London Bridge, a few fellow passengers noticed our Denmark tops and smiled. We smiled back. (Amazing how the eyes do all the work, as our masks were busy obscuring our mouths and smearing our face-paint.) But then we got on the Tube to Wembley stadium, which gradually began filling up with fans. The singing began, and it hazily occured to me that it somehow sounded angry. We grinned and made our way from the station toward Wembley. A male England fan got a few inches from my face and shouted “Jeg elsker dig!”, “I love you” in Danish. I shouted back “Jeg elsker ogsaa dig!”, preparing to make humour my default response to any loutishness as the night went on. Things felt less tense once we neared the Danish section, though plenty of English fans were there. The singing in the beer queues got louder. There was a distinct paucity of women among the England fans, whereas the Danes were more evenly balanced. One Danish woman made a shushing sound to a group of ten or so singing at the top of their lungs. They ignored her. An England fan stuck a foam pointer-finger into my wife’s breasts and leered. I took her arm and we hustled to our seats, where quite a few England fans were seated. An emotional tribute to Christian Eriksen, who had a heart attack in Denmark’s first match, brought tears to many eyes. But then the national anthems came. Was that booing from the England fans during “Der er et yndigt land”, the Danish anthem? I couldn’t believe it at the moment, but press reports confirmed it later. For ten minutes tiny Denmark thought it might beat England, ten times its size. The England fan in front of me, who flew his middle finger at the Denmark section he sat in, was briefly chastened after a perfect free kick put Denmark up. Then came the equaliser, and out came the finger again. England won 2-1, after 120 minutes. Our nerves were shredded, as were those of my oldest English friend I was texting with. My son refused to cry, so the tears just made their way out of his eyes as he grimaced. We rushed out, eager to beat the crowds for more than the usual reasons. On the Jubilee Line home, a gang started singing: “We’re gonna rape the Italians… We’re gonna rape the Italians…” My wife said, sharply and loud enough for them to hear, “Ew.” The chant died down, as my son fell asleep on her shoulder, the flags on his cheeks by now a Jackson Pollock of red and white. Once again, I wondered why people who should be elated sounded so furious. On the train, a passenger congratulated us, and told us how much he’d loved Copenhagen on his visits. My wife gave him tips for his next one. Five minutes from home, our bus hit a roundabout blocked by dancing and cheering fans, and a flatbed lorry on which more were dancing. Ugh, I thought, but also, hey, I’d be dancing too. A long pause. So close. Then someone outside spotted my shirt: “Hey, Denmark!” He pointed for his friends, and in an instant a dozen or so pressed up against the glass and began beating on the windows. Middle fingers, jeers, masturbation hand-gestures, oral sex mimed at my wife. And, of course, the famous English two-fingered salute. Victory in reverse. I gritted my teeth through a smile and a wave. It only escalated, so when the bus driver opened the door, I went over to it and waved some more, visibly annoyed but saying “congratulations, your team played the better game, you won.” My wife did the same. I guess I expected, finally, happy cheers, the fever breaking. Instead, one screamed back at my wife “That’s not what we want to hear!” What did they want to hear? Then it came, a shot to my stomach that knocked me back a couple of steps. I hadn’t seen it, but now a short, shaved-headed fan in a white t-shirt was bobbing in the thrill of it, grinning to his friends and staring at me, no doubt hoping I would get off the bus. I did some arithmetic, declined, and instead started shouting something silly like “you should be ashamed of yourselves.” They loved every moment. Maybe that’s what they wanted to hear. Finally, the bus crawled through the roundabout. My son had fled upstairs. Another passenger, it turned out, had been slapped by the same fan who had punched me, and offered to be a police witness. We exchanged details, went home, and went to bed. At daybreak, the anger was still inexplicable. This should be one of the happiest nights of their lives. Plenty of people were jubilant. Why were some looking for a punch-up? Mass psychology is, of course, part of it. A soldier quoted by Jonathan Haidt, a psychologist, in his book “The Righteous Mind”, described an ecstasy that came from learning to drill with his fellows: “a strange sense of personal enlargement; a sort of swelling out, becoming bigger than life, thanks to participation in collective ritual.” Swap in singing or chanting for marching, and you have an ancient, universal human sentiment: it feels good to be part of something bigger than yourself. But at some point that becomes tribalism. Late in the match, resigned to Denmark losing, I remembered that the Danish and English flags were almost identical with reversed colours. “The Sneetches”, a children’s fable by Dr Seuss, tells of the Star-Belly Sneetches, who feel superior to the Sneetches without stars. The desire to belong needs contrast, it seems. And there is also the fact that adrenaline is a drug that feeds and is fed by tribalism. Having consumed many pints of another drug, the mob were on a volatile mix of downers and uppers, one bought at the pub and one the “fight-or-flight” hormone generated by glands sitting on top of their kidneys. I know: I felt it too. It feels fantastic to be furious. But have you tried serotonin, the brain’s happiness drug? Oxytocin, the love hormone? They’re a gorgeous rush, too. As the next day wore on and well wishes poured in as I told the story, I remembered the decency of nearly every English person I’ve ever met. In a counter to the mob, I remembered another quintessential trait: the apology, again and again, on behalf of their country. It had never occurred to me to hold all England responsible. Plenty of English fans were gloriously, peacefully high on serotonin that night. But plenty, it is more than obvious, prefer the hard stuff. Why soccer? (Rugby, a far more brutal game, sees far less fan violence.) Why so associated with England? (I’m not sure any of my hypotheses would survive rigorous scrutiny. One Danish journalist wrote, rather bitterly, “they have nothing else”, but that’s not true.) England is complex—one of those images that is either a young woman or an old crone. You can’t quite see them both at the same time. Both really are there. You just have to decide what you want to see.