In every Protestant town, on every loyalist estate, the fires are ready to burn. In Monkstown, a 15-minute drive from Belfast, there will be two, one for each paramilitary organisation on the estate. “This one’s the UVF [Ulster Volunteer Force],” a teenage boy told me, pointing to a mound of old sofas, mattresses, cardboard boxes and pallets. “The other one’s UDA [Ulster Defence Association].” On July 10th the teenager and his friends will be sure to get here by 10.30pm, in time to fan the flames. Then it’s down to the bottom of the estate to “see the other boney get lit”. The spectacle is part historical re-enactment – bonfires were lit in 1690 to celebrate the arrival of Protestant “King Billy” of Orange, who defeated the Catholic King James II – and part sectarian show of strength. But mostly it’s one big party: as one of the boys tells me, “Everyone’s on the drink.” This year there ought to be another reason for a party: the 100th birthday of Northern Ireland, this Protestant redoubt on a mostly Catholic island. But Protestants are in no mood to celebrate. The proximate cause of their gloom is the Northern Ireland protocol, part of the Brexit deal which lumps Northern Ireland with the Republic for customs purposes and makes Protestants feel a little less British than they are comfortable with. Yet, as I discovered on a road trip around the province, there is more to the Protestant malaise than Brexit. Speaking to ex-paramilitaries on council estates, middle-class Protestants in Belfast and devout farmers by the border, I found an epidemic of pessimism and self-doubt that seemed far graver than the fuss over the protocol. Whether they called themselves Protestants, unionists, loyalists or all three, each in their own way cherished their identity, and each felt it was under threat. The boneys came to seem less like sparklers to celebrate the centenary and more like funeral pyres. “I don’t want to sound like I’m raging against the dying of the light,” a unionist writer told me in the bar of a fancy Belfast hotel. “[But] the whole thing’s falling apart.” My trip had begun on a muggy Sunday afternoon in Bessbrook, a village in the border county of Armagh. Protestants used to be in the majority in the village, but they are now outnumbered by Catholics one to four. It was a big day for the local branch of the Orange Order, a Protestant fraternity. Its annual district service was being held in a square outside the village hall, and a large marching band – children and women with accordions, a man with the obligatory big drum – was on hand. Many Orangemen were wearing their suits for the first time since covid struck. As the girls from the band played on the swings in a nearby park, the preacher addressed the brethren (all men, by tradition) from the back of a white van – adorned with two enormous Union Jacks – its tailgate more accustomed to delivery than deliverance. “Heavenly Father, as we come before you in prayer once again, we pray for our nation at this time, still very much in the shadow of covid-19,” he began, the van rocking a little as the Orangeman who introduced him took his seat. I wondered whether he would allude to the malaise, but he soon addressed it directly, with a distinct Northern Irish blend of politics and prayer. “Heavenly Father...businesses in every sector are struggling with rising costs, increasing amounts of bureaucracy and difficulty in obtaining supplies from Great Britain.” He went on: “To date, O Lord, the problems caused by this protocol seem to have been ignored by both our national government and the European Union...Enable them to find a solution that protects and enhances the union with Great Britain as opposed to undermining it...” The protocol was clearly, as a shop assistant put it a few days later, “in everybody’s heads”. On the mainland, the deal was the butt of newspaper cartoons about sausages (after an implementation period that was recently extended by three months, shops in Northern Ireland won’t be able to sell chilled meat from Britain). Here, the protocol was top of the agenda. “Shankill Road says ‘no’ to Irish Sea border”, a poster declared. As the brethren had marched to the service from their pebbledash Orange hall, the atmosphere had seemed jovial. They joshed with each other (“That’s a lot of aftershave. Is that you or the boys in front?”) and called out to (presumably Protestant) locals standing outside their houses to watch the spectacle. An elderly woman tapped her zimmer frame to the music. But ask anyone what the general mood was like and the answer was bleak. “There’s a lot of concern and I’d say there’s a lot of anger about a lot of things going on,” said Robert Cartmill, a dairy farmer and official in the local Orange Order, who wore his father’s orange sash. The preacher wound down with a final reminder that we all “have a debt of sin that we cannot ever hope to pay off” and then the band struck up “God Save the Queen”. The brethren marched back the way they came, past the Crafty Wishes art shop, past the funeral directors, past someone’s bedsheets and towels, pegged out beneath heavy skies with precious optimism. At the bottom of the village, they massed outside the Orange hall, standing in the road for a final blast of the national anthem. As a queue of cars built up, the men sang on, impervious to the present for a moment longer. I woke early the next morning. Fending off a waitress unimpressed by my toast and Weetabix (“Are you sure you won’t have any breakfast?” she asked as I left), I drove back to Bessbrook, feeling that I hadn’t done it justice the day before. I planned to call in on Robert Cartmill on his farm, hoping the absence of pomp might encourage a more reflective conversation with the Orangeman. Bessbrook looked different in the sun. The clock above the town hall was still stopped and the weeds still grew tall around the old linen mill, which housed several thousand soldiers during the Troubles (“I knew all the different helicopters by name and sound,” said a villager). But the village was beautiful, both peaceful and full of life. There was a deli and a butcher’s shop, a greengrocer’s and a chemist’s. Ivy adorned cottage walls and gardens flourished. I drove on for a mile, past an Anglican church, a Presbyterian church and a Catholic chapel, before pulling up at Cartmill’s farm, passed down from father to son since 1942. Wearing a short-sleeved shirt (the checks red, white and blue), Cartmill seemed more at ease than the day before. I had intended to ask him more about his faith – in God, and in Northern Ireland – to try to understand a philosophy that is so often caricatured on the mainland. I hadn’t expected his daughter, Deborah, an English-literature student who had just finished her final exams at Cambridge University, to join us. We sat outside drinking coffee in the sunshine, the crows cawing in the trees. In the end, I let Deborah ask most of the questions. We were curious about the same things; she seemed more entitled to be inquisitive, and occasionally impertinent. From time to time she would glance at her father, keen not to hurt his feelings. Deborah was frustrated, she said, by her fellow Cambridge students’ lack of understanding and knowledge about her community (“some people have watched ‘Derry Girls’ and they think they know everything”). But, in common with other bright young people who leave Northern Ireland for the mainland and often never come back, there was a lot about its politics she didn’t understand either. “I feel a sense of frustration that it all comes down to [Catholic] Green and [Protestant] Orange,” she said. She and her father talked about the extent to which their upbringings were shaped by the Troubles. Cartmill, who grew up with bombings and shootings on the television, said he was “warped” by it. His daughter, raised on the same farm but after the peace accord, said things were “more subtle”. “I wouldn’t say it was warped as such. But coloured, maybe.” She knew, for instance, about the Kingsmill massacre in 1976, callous even by the standards of the Troubles, but was hazy on the details. “Wasn’t [that] when they asked who was Protestant and who was Catholic?” she asked her father. Cartmill recalled how Republican gunmen had laid an ambush on a country road, stopping a bus of workers coming home from a factory. They shot dead ten Protestants (an 11th survived); the one Catholic was ordered to run away. “That happened over the hill there,” he said. “My father came into the house saying he heard the gunfire.” It’s not hard to see how such things might warp perspective. “So many of the shootings, there was local knowledge of neighbours,” Cartmill went on. “We enjoy the peace now, we get on with all our Catholic neighbours, but there’s always still a distrust there, that at some time it will all kick off again.” That kicking off no longer seems so unlikely. The riots in Northern Ireland in late March and early April were the worst for several years. Young loyalists threw petrol bombs and hijacked a bus, setting it alight. Dozens of police officers were injured. Only the need to show respect when the Duke of Edinburgh died stopped the violence (“nothing should besmirch his memory,” tweeted a unionist politician). Since then, hundreds of men in balaclavas have paraded around towns on unofficial marches. Both the first minister and her successor as leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) have resigned, claimed by intra-Protestant squabbling about the protocol and whether to concede to nationalist demands for the Irish language to have more status in the province. “We’re a bit down and we’re let down,” one of the Orangemen told me in Bessbrook. None of that, though, accounts for the existential nature of the gloom. That is all down to numbers. In the deal that brought peace to Northern Ireland in 1998, politicians on both sides agreed that a referendum on Irish unification should be held if it ever seemed likely that it could be won. This was once a remote prospect: the borders of the province were drawn a century ago to ensure a Protestant – and therefore unionist – majority. But the more recent census, published next year, is likely to confirm a slim Catholic majority for the first time. The link between Catholicism and nationalism is less automatic than Protestantism and unionism (some Northern Irish Catholics see the merits of remaining part of Britain: the economic benefits, the National Health Service). Nonetheless, the direction of travel seems clear, at least to people like Robert Cartmill, who admitted, “I’m scared of what the future’s going to be.” That night I drove to Monkstown, to a boxing club where I’d been told I could chat to some young loyalists, a label working-class Protestants are happiest to claim. In a backroom that smelt of sweat, to the thwack of punchbag practice, I spoke to three men in their late teens. They wore sports gear and a world-weariness beyond their years. (What’s the estate like, I asked. “I wouldn’t say it was rough.” “Decently quiet.”) They were very funny. “My dad’s criminal record is longer than the Holy Bible,” one told me. “I’m not even joking, I’ve seen it before. It’s scary.” One of the men claimed to have been a rioter. Another insisted he gleaned his deep knowledge from the sidelines. “Did you see it? Good craic like, wasn’t it?” It was organised on Facebook, he said: “It’d be ‘Cloughfern [roundabout] tonight, half six kick off’.” There were bottles and bricks...and “Paddy wagons”. “Paddy what?” I asked. “England don’t have them,” said his friend for my benefit. “They got horses, pal,” chipped in the third. Paddy wagons, the rioter explained, are “police jeeps. They can take bricks being thrown at their windows and stuff.” What was the point of the rioting, I asked? “I think part of it would have been to do with emotions and people’s love for this country,” he went on. “I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of the saying ‘Our wee country’ and that’s for Northern Ireland. I think there’s just been some emotions as well of like ‘this is our country and you’re not taking it’ kind of thing.” And, as his friend was honest enough to admit, there was also the craic. “Say an old granny is getting robbed next door, your first thought isn’t help her, it’s watch it. We are helpful to a certain extent until we get a bit of entertainment, something to watch.” They all expect more trouble. “I’m worried about the summer,” Connal Parr, a Belfast-born historian who feels both Irish and English, had told me before I flew to Northern Ireland. “Scary conversations are taking place,” confided a youngster on one estate. The atmosphere, he said, was “very tense”. One of the men at the boxing club said the riots were a statement of intent: “You come for our country, this is what’s going to happen.” There was, doubtless, a degree of bravado in their insistence that, like generations before them, they’d join one of the paramilitary groups in the event of a referendum (“I don’t see loyalists letting go of this country”). And most people have no enthusiasm for the return of violence, even if some foresee it. Yet as I drove back to the airport, I realised that I, too, had succumbed to the gloom. With any luck, the Troubles will never return. But it’s hard to imagine loyalists sitting back as a united Ireland becomes ever more likely. Nationalists think that “history is on their side”, said Parr, repeating a phrase he heard once. “That’s how they see it, that the clock is ticking. They both think that’s what’s about to happen.” So it’s on with the bonfires, on with the marching, on with the past in the present and the future. There is loutishness, naked sectarianism and provocation. But there is also a deep loyalty that, in the final analysis, is to tribe, to neighbourhood. “Bring a picnic and your family” to the next parade, the Orange officer had instructed the Bessbrook brethren. As people on the mainland worry about a rise in loneliness, there is a lot to admire in the strength of these neighbourly bonds, forged over generations. Yet the impulse that leads to picnics – connection to kith and kin, community spirit, defined as much by who it excludes as who it includes – is ultimately the same impulse that leads good men and bad to pick up guns or hurl petrol bombs. It is, to borrow from W.B. Yeats, a terrible beauty. ■ Tom Rowley is a staff writer at 1843 PHOTOGRAPHS: SEAMUS MURPHY