THE DURBAR ROOM at Osborne, Queen Victoria’s seaside home on the Isle of Wight, is a tribute to Indian craftsmanship. Created in 1891 by Bhai Ram Singh and Lockwood Kipling from the Mayo School of Art, Lahore, the room’s decor fuses Islamic forms with designs found in Jain and Hindu temples. Step past the gifts bestowed on Victoria, Empress of India, however, and you come upon a portrait of an elegant black woman in her wedding dress. The artwork reveals a lesser-known side of the long-reigning monarch. Omoba Aina was born in 1843 in what is now south-west Nigeria. Orphaned as a child during a war with neighbouring Dahomey, she was held captive by its ruler, King Gezo, until 1850, when she was given as a gift to Frederick Forbes. He was a British naval officer, who in the decades following the Slavery Abolition Act of 1833 was sent on (largely unsuccessful) diplomatic missions to persuade figures such as Gezo to give up the slave trade, too. Forbes renamed the little girl Sarah Forbes Bonetta. He brought her back to England and presented her to Queen Victoria, whose diary entries suggest she warmed to the child immediately, becoming her guardian and organising her education. Her place in high society assured, Forbes Bonetta remained close to the queen until her death from tuberculosis at the age of 37. The portrait is the work of Hannah Uzor, a British-Zambian artist (pictured). On show at Osborne during Black History Month in October, it is now back at the stately home as part of “Painting our Past: The African Diaspora in England”, a cleverly conceived, multi-site exhibition through which English Heritage aims to highlight little-known black figures associated with the more than 400 properties in its care. Having spotted Ms Uzor’s portrait on Instagram, the charity acquired it and went on to commission five more portraits from artists who are themselves of African heritage. Dotted across the country in English Heritage properties, the subjects span the centuries, starting with Septimius Severus, a Libyan-born Roman emperor who came to Britain in the third century (Elena Njoabuzia Onwochei-Garcia’s painting is pictured below), and ending with Arthur Roberts, one of the few black British soldiers to have fought on the Western front during the first world war (plenty of troops from across the empire also took part). Included in the line-up is Abbot Hadrian, a north African scholar who came to Britain in the seventh century but resisted the pope’s attempts to make him Archbishop of Canterbury. He spent 40 years as abbot of St Augustine’s Abbey in Kent, building a library and travelling the country to train priests. “If you haven’t read Bede, you may not be aware of Abbot Hadrian, an influential scholar linking this country with a wider European discourse,” says Matt Thompson, head curator of English Heritage’s collections. The charity was looking to widen the circle of artists with whom it collaborates, and in some cases wrote to people “out of the blue”, Mr Thompson says. “At first I thought it was a scam,” says Clifton Powell, the Jamaican-born artist who portrayed Abbot Hadrian. Mr Powell, who came to Britain in the 1980s, empathised with the abbot’s single-minded dedication. Using Gregorian chant to inspire him, he has produced a suitably pious work in the tradition of the Spanish Old Masters. Ms Uzor had been researching black figures from the Victorian era for some time before English Heritage bought her painting. She discovered Forbes Bonetta’s story in David Olusoga’s book of 2016, “Black and British: A Forgotten History”. She based her portrait on an image captured by Camille Silvy, a 19th-century society photographer, and has overlaid the painted folds of Forbes Bonetta’s dress with folds of white organza, to striking effect. For Ms Uzor, the fabric is a visual tool to challenge the viewer’s assumptions not only about subject matter and history, but also about painterly forms. “You might be comfortable seeing a black woman in a Victorian dress,” she says. “But are you comfortable seeing fabric on a portrait?” English Heritage’s exhibition is designed to confound audience expectations. On show at Kenwood House in north London is a portrait of Dido Belle, the illegitimate daughter of a young enslaved black woman and a Royal Naval officer, who was brought up as part of the aristocratic Murray family who lived in the mansion. The show comes at a time when the so-called culture wars in Britain are intensifying. Last year the National Trust (another key heritage body) published a report on its properties with links to slavery and colonialism; the move has attracted criticism from some on the political right. In November 26 Conservative MPs signed a letter to the Daily Telegraph claiming that the trust had been taken over by “elitist bourgeois liberals” pursuing a “woke agenda”. The newspaper went on to suggest that Tim Parker, the charity’s chairman, had resigned abruptly rather than face a vote of no confidence over his role in commissioning the report. (In fact, he had not commissioned the report and, according to the trust, his departure had been long planned.) For Ms Uzor, it is important to take the long-term view. “In the future, when things have died down, those English Heritage paintings are going to be there offering a narrative,” she says. “When we send our kids to museums, they look at paintings...that were once controversial. What’s important is the legacy the paintings leave.” “Painting Our Past: The African Diaspora in England” continues at six English Heritage sites; english-heritage.org.uk