WHEN BJÖRN ANDRÉSEN auditioned for Luchino Visconti, a legendary Italian director, in 1970, he had low expectations. He thought it would take five minutes and then he would go to rehearse with his band; were he to get a part in the film, perhaps it would be a fun summer job. “There were a lot of other young guys there going in and out,” he says, recalling the hotel room in Stockholm. “But for my audition, five minutes got to ten minutes, and half an hour, and then an hour. We went to buy swimming trunks in the middle of it all so I was a little bewildered.” The crew took leering photographs of him and he felt awkward and embarrassed. “I was a little bit uncomfortable when they wanted me to strip my sweater.” Visconti was a towering presence in world cinema, having made acclaimed films including “Obsession” (1943), “Rocco and his Brothers” (1960) and “The Leopard” (1963). He cast Mr Andrésen in “Death in Venice” (1971), a story of infatuation and mortality, adapted from Thomas Mann’s novella and set to the music of Gustav Mahler. Then aged 15, he starred as Tadzio, a young boy who becomes the object of obsession of an ailing composer, Gustav von Aschenbach (Dirk Bogarde). Visconti reckoned Mr Andrésen was a perfect fit for the part on account of being “the most beautiful boy in the world”. A grimly fascinating new documentary of that title, directed by Kristina Lindstrom and Kristian Petri, explores the actor’s experience of harassment and adolescent stardom. Mr Andrésen was suddenly thrust into the limelight, pushed by his ambitious grandmother (his mother had committed suicide when he was young); he had little guidance through the process or protection on set. The documentary alleges that Visconti told his crew to keep their “hands off” Mr Andrésen, underscoring the predatory nature of the film business. The promotional tour was almost as unnerving, Mr Andrésen says. When the film had its premiere at Cannes Film Festival, he was taken to a gay club, an experience he describes as “nightmarish” due to the unwelcome attention he received. On a promotional tour in Japan, he was met with a Beatlemania-esque welcome. (The famous image of Tadzio from the film, an androgynous long-haired boy in a sailor outfit, would inspire a generation of Manga artists.) Mr Andrésen found himself embarking on a career in the country, starring in adverts and releasing a string of pop songs sung in Japanese. Though Mr Andrésen says he still loves the people, culture and food of Japan, it was a bleak period of his life: his handlers controlled his routine and plied him with pills. Things did not improve when he returned to Europe, and he started supplementing the pills with booze. Mr Andrésen’s story is not an altogether unfamiliar one. Film-makers have a dark history of mistreating their young stars from Judy Garland to Corey Feldman; the #MeToo movement has done much to expose and condemn such behaviour. Visconti might have been more aware of the vulnerability of his lead actor, however. In 1951 he had released “Bellissima”, a film about a fame-obsessed mother pushing her daughter to audition for a new film, heedless of her welfare. Now aged 66, Mr Andrésen is no longer the epitome of youth he played in the film, but he is still a physically striking figure—tall with long, white hair and a beard. He exudes a kind of calm, thoughtful charisma. “I don’t see myself having been abused, at least not physically,” he says. When “Death of Venice” was broadcast on television recently, he says he appreciated the artistic “qualities of the film”. Although a musician first and foremost, Mr Andrésen has returned to acting, producing a show-stealing performance in Ari Aster’s “Midsommar” in 2019. “A horror movie, that was my dream ever since I was five or six years old,” he says. “It was great fun. They made three copies of my whole head, and one of them had an exploding face.” “The Most Beautiful Boy in the World” is unflinching in its depiction of the vicissitudes of fame, but it never feels intrusive or exploitative. Though the culture on Hollywood’s sets is changing, the pressures that come with sudden exposure will surely persist. If Mr Andrésen had the opportunity to go back to 1970, what would he tell that 15-year-old boy? “The most spontaneous reaction I get to that question is: ‘Run!’ But on the other hand, [the film] has given me opportunities to have experiences I would never have had,” he says. “So I’m both thankful and pissed off at the same time.” “The Most Beautiful Boy in the World” is released in cinemas in Britain on July 30th. It will be released in America in September