EAGLE-EYED BEACHCOMBERS may recognise the round white shells etched with a five-petal flower. These erstwhile homes of sea urchins resemble a silver dollar, earning them the nickname “sand dollars” and the myth that they are the money of mermaids or the long-lost city of Atlantis. They pile up on the shores of the 700 islands in the Bahamas, so its central bank picked the sand dollar as its logo. In October 2020, when the Bahamas launched the world’s first central-bank digital currency (CBDC), the authorities chose to adorn the app with the familiar floral pattern and call it the sand dollar. CBDCs are a digital version of cash—the physical money issued by central banks. In most countries, their design will resemble existing online platforms, but with a difference: money held as a CBDC is equivalent to a deposit with the central bank. In China more than 100,000 people have downloaded a similar trial mobile-phone app, enabling them to spend small government handouts of digital cash, or “e-yuan”. The app, like the paper yuan, depicts Mao Zedong. European officials want to launch a digital euro by 2025. On April 19th the Bank of England and the British Treasury launched a taskforce to consider the idea. In America the Fed is also looking into it. A survey by the Bank for International Settlements finds a large majority of central banks researching or experimenting with CBDCs. They may be in use by countries with a fifth of the world’s population in as little as three years’ time. Until recently the concept of a retail CBDC was the province solely of starry-eyed economists, an interesting but impractical idea. But “in just two years we have seen a dramatic change in the way people and authorities think and talk about money,” says Jean-Pierre Landau, a former deputy governor of the Banque de France. “I cannot think—in peacetime and outside of a crisis—of a recent period where so much has changed in the way people think about money.” What has prompted the shift? Mr Landau thinks it was “the wake-up call that Libra represented.” Libra was the first name for a digital currency and payments network announced in June 2019 by Facebook, which planned to issue tokens backed by a basket of currencies. “This was a real shock for most of the international monetary community,” says Mr Landau. A second driver was the decline in the use of cash. If cash can no longer be used for transactions it loses much potency, as it has to be a means of exchange if it is to be a store of value. Yet it is still a radical intervention to issue CBDCs, which threaten the traditional banking system. This underpins much lending, especially in poorer countries, so its displacement could undermine the provision of credit.For two centuries most monetary systems have relied on the framework of a lender-of-last-resort in the form of a government-backed body that can step in to save solvent financial institutions. The modern iteration of this is an independent central bank. It provides money both in cash and by creating bank reserves (cash deposits that banks hold with it). The private bits of the monetary system are the banks. They provide banking services by collecting deposits and making loans. By holding only a portion of these deposits and lending the rest, banks create money: the original deposits remain ready to be called on in full, but there are now new deposits from the proceeds of the loans. All deposits can be used as money to make payments. But the new money is created by the mere stroke of bankers’ pens. “The process by which banks make money is so simple that the mind is repelled,” wrote J.K. Galbraith in 1975. “Where something so important is involved only a deeper mystery seems decent.” The discovery that banks could create money “came early in the development of banking,” said Galbraith. “There was that interest to be earned. Where such reward is waiting men have a natural instinct for innovation.” Most money is created by banks. In America the quantity of broad money stayed the same as a share of GDP for 100 years (though the pandemic spurred a dash for cash). Some 90% of it is in private bank deposits. In other economies the share is higher: 91% in the euro area, 93% in Japan and 97% in Britain. This system has flaws. Because loans are long-term illiquid assets, whereas deposits are short-term liquid liabilities, banks need a lender-of-last-resort in a crisis. This creates other concerns because it fosters moral hazard through greater risk-taking. Regulators may try to curb this through prudential oversight, but this has not always worked. Facebook threatened all this, with its huge network of users potentially meaning that more than 2bn people could adopt a new currency. This made Libra instantly credible as a medium of exchange. Its network would have been cross-border. And in its original incarnation it would have introduced a new unit of account. This raised the prospect of citizens using currencies over which central banks had no control. Regulatory authorities duly resisted the idea. It has now been reimagined as Diem, pegged 1-for-1 with global currencies such as the dollar or euro. In the cryptocurrency world such tokens are called stablecoins. Diem has yet to launch, but “even if that project never sees the light of day it has changed the world dramatically,” says Mr Landau. Parallel payment systems, especially supra-sovereign ones, threaten the usual channels for monetary policy, which run through the banks. “It really depends on what happens with regard to digital payments and whether those are entirely outside the banking system,” says one senior central banker. “To the extent that they are, I think that would create a real gap in terms of monetary-policy transmission. If digital payments are entirely done within the banking system, then the monetary-policy transmission mechanism would be retained, but I do not think that is the world we are headed into.” The redundancy of cash makes matters worse. Cash is the safest form of money. “Confidence in the system rests on the ability of the holder to transfer their money into the safest asset, even though they may never do that. The fact that they know they can just anchors the whole system,” says Sir Jon Cunliffe, deputy governor of the Bank of England. “When stress really comes the knowledge that they could is what matters.” The hard truth is that monetary authorities have long felt uneasy about the weaknesses of banks. These include the share of people that are unbanked, even in rich countries, the high costs of payment methods and the inordinate cost of cross-border transactions (which eats into remittances to poorer countries). The appeal of a cheaper, seamless system has accelerated faster payment projects around the world. These include the FedNow system, a real-time payment system for America due to enter into use in 2023. Both fear and opportunity are key motivators for the Bahamas. It would be easy to envisage residents relying exclusively on a convenient currency like Diem, circumventing the ability of the central bank to regulate the money supply. “We want to provide an infrastructure in a very small country that may not be justified on just business considerations if left entirely up to the financial institutions and individuals,” said John Rolle, governor of the Bahamian central bank, in March. Because of its scattered island geography, the Bahamas has many remote communities with limited access to banking services. Central-bank wallet apps may not sound revolutionary, but the idea of a central bank providing digital money directly to citizens is radical. If citizens can convert bank deposits into central-bank money with a simple swipe, the technology “has the potential to be run-accelerant,” said Lael Brainard, a Federal Reserve governor, in 2019. This could pull deposits out of the banking system and onto the central bank’s balance-sheet, disintermediating the banks. This might not be a problem if take-up of CBDCs were low. Bank deposits in America are worth $16.8trn. Banks hold more reserves with the Fed than they need, an excess of around $3.3trn. Any initial movement of deposits from a bank to the Fed would come from these. “You could get a significant amount of migration to the Fed in the current high-reserve environment really without affecting bank lending,” says Morgan Ricks, of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. One idea proposed by researchers at the Bank of England and the European Central Bank is to limit how much can be held in a CBDC. But Sir Paul Tucker, formerly at the Bank of England, suggests this would face a credibility hurdle. “The hardest thing for the government or the state generally is to stick to a commitment of restraint.” If CBDCs proved popular, they could suck all deposits out of the banking system. In America this would stretch the central bank’s balance-sheet from $8trn to a whopping $21.5trn. Who, then, would provide the $15trn of loans that banks now extend to the American economy?Perhaps a central bank could simply pass the funds back to the banks by lending at its policy interest rate. But it is hard to see the idea of the Federal Reserve extending trillion-dollar loans to the likes of JPMorgan Chase or Bank of America as being politically uncontroversial. A radically different world, at least in rich countries, would eliminate fractional-reserve banks as the source of most or even all lending. “Narrow banking” is the name for the idea that banks should be required to hold sufficient liquid assets to back all their deposits. It was put forward in 1933 as the “Chicago Plan”, after the devastation of the Depression. It would end the system of fractional-reserve banking by breaking the link between the extension of credit and the creation of money. As the monetary theorist Irving Fisher summed up the idea: “In short: nationalise money but do not nationalise banking.” The appeal of narrow banking has continued, with support for the concept coming from the likes of Milton Friedman, James Tobin and Hyman Minsky. The idea of CBDCs has led to a further revival. Yet beyond the problem of transitioning from one system to another, narrow banking has its own difficulties. What banks do with fractional reserves is to turn short-term liquid funds into long-term illiquid loans. Deposits are not much good sitting idle, but they are when used as the basis for riskier lending. The benefits of linking savers, who prefer safety and liquidity, with borrowers, who like flexibility and security, are enormous. Joseph Schumpeter wrote in the 1930s that it was “one of the most characteristic features of the financial side of the capitalist evolution to ‘mobilise’ all, even the longest maturities” so that they are financed by short-term borrowing. “This is not mere technique. This is part of the core of the capitalist process.” Banks liberate innovation and investment, the engines of Schumpeter’s creative destruction, from the “voluntary abstinence routine of the savers.” If authorities were to curb liquidity and maturity transformation through narrow banking, they might damage growth. But if liquidity and maturity transformation is as useful as many claim, “I think you would just find it replicated elsewhere,” says Peter Fisher of Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth. And in such a case the central bank could find itself in the position of having to intervene in all sorts of institutions other than banks. Although other institutions could lend to businesses and households, they could not promise to do so instantly. “The key credit facility is an on-demand facility or an overdraft facility. I am running a small business and I might need more working capital right now!” notes Sir Paul. Businesses now get this from banks, which offer it because they make money. “Because they can create money instantly, they can provide liquidity via credit facilities instantly. A pension or other fund cannot do that. For them it is resources in, resources out,” he says. With diminished or no banks, it is hard to see how firms would retain access to immediate credit in times of crisis—as they did in March 2020, when corporate treasurers across America drew down billions of dollars-worth of credit lines overnight. That is the superpower of banks. In their absence the role of the central bank would have to swell further. Mervyn King, a former governor of the Bank of England, has proposed that central banks should lend, with various haircuts, to anyone who could supply collateral, a “pawnbroker for all seasons” to replace the lender-of-last-resort. But existing collateral systems have become fraught with complexity. Europe has a collateral framework to enable refinancing operations. “This system told you what you could post and what the haircuts were,” says Stephen Cecchetti, of Brandeis University. “Over the past 15 years it has anywhere from 25,000-30,000 securities in it, many of which were fabricated in order to actually meet the requirements of the collateral policy.” It stretched to include many things. “At one point, somewhere deep inside, there was a security that included Lionel Messi’s contract.” Mr Cecchetti argues that no central bank could cope with such variety, with securities in different buckets, each with a discount to their market value. “Collateral systems can end up distorting the price of credit. This could become a concern with a pawnbroker system.” Sir Paul thinks that “Deep in the political economy of the money and credit architecture there is a choice.” The choice most countries have made is to have fractional-reserve banks. “We choose, as a society, to have the financial-stability problem (which becomes an urgent priority) in order to keep the state out of or minimise the role of the state in credit allocation,” he says. The provision of easier direct access to central banks, through CBDCs, is likely to pull more assets into the central bank. It is hard to see how this does not lead to more central-bank intervention in credit. And keeping distance between the state and credit allocation in a world without banks is only the start. “The three biggest problems I have [with CBDCs] are disintermediation of the banking system, privacy and currency substitution across borders,” says Mr Cecchetti. “China has fewer concerns about privacy, they have state-owned banks, and they have capital controls.” The magnitude of these issues make the idea of introducing CBDCs one that central bankers cannot decide by themselves. Nor do they believe they should. “The bottom line is that to move forward on this we would need buy-in from Congress, from the administration, from broad elements of the public,” said Jerome Powell, the Fed chairman, in March. “That would ideally come in the form of an authorising law, rather than us trying to interpret our existing law to enable this.” A new era of public money would, in short, require public approval.■