The Light of Days. By Judy Batalion. William Morrow; 576 pages; $28.99. Virago; £20 THE GREAT chronicler of the Warsaw ghetto, Emanuel Ringelblum, wrote of the female Jewish couriers who travelled across Nazi-occupied Poland: “Without a murmur, without a second’s hesitation, they accept and carry out the most dangerous missions…The story of the Jewish woman will be a glorious page in the history of Jewry during the present war.” Except it was not. Many such tales were recounted in “Freuen in di Ghettos” (“Women in the Ghettos”), an obscure Yiddish book published in New York in 1946, then largely forgotten. That is, until 2007, when Judy Batalion, a Jewish Canadian, found a copy in the British Library. Here was page after page of jaw-dropping courage—of “ghetto girls” who smuggled weapons, flirted with Nazis then killed them, blew up trains, sabotaged Vilnius’s electricity supply, rescued children and dug escape tunnels. She speaks for many when she writes: “Despite years of Jewish education, I’d never read accounts like these…I had no idea how many Jewish women were involved in the resistance effort.” In “The Light of Days” Ms Batalion, herself the granddaughter of Polish Holocaust survivors, fills the gap. Built on years of further research, her powerful study is an important addition to the Holocaust canon—and to the understanding of the response of eastern Europe’s Jewish communities to the Nazi extermination. There were armed resistance movements in more than 90 ghettos, Ms Batalion says, but she mainly focuses on Warsaw, Vilnius, Bedzin and Krakow. She vividly recounts the formation of the fighting organisations in these cities—and the opposition they often faced from some fellow Jews and the Judenrats, or Jewish Councils. Many Judenrats still believed the best way to save lives was by working with the Nazis to keep order; they deployed Jewish police officers to help in round-ups. The story is told through the eyes of a group of young women fighters. Renia Kukielka was, typically, “neither an idealist nor a revolutionary but a savvy, middle-class girl who happened to find herself in a sudden and unrelenting nightmare”. She and her comrades procured weapons and ammunition, learned how to use them, made Molotov cocktails, faced down the Gestapo with false papers and did not confess under torture. As Chajka Klinger, a resistance leader in Bedzin, recalled: “No revolutionary movement, let alone [one of] the young, had ever faced problems similar to ours—the single, naked fact of annihilation, of death.” Their heroism was astounding. Bela Hazan worked in a Gestapo office under a pseudonym. Frumka Plotnicka, a key resistance organiser (second from right in the picture), fought in the Bedzin ghetto uprising, shooting at the Nazis till her last few moments. She was dragged half-burnt from a bunker and shot. Pacey as the narrative is (it has been optioned by Steven Spielberg), the large cast and jumps in time and geography demand close attention. More of the Nazi perspective on the fighters would have made a useful counterpoint. To them, the Jews were passive untermenschen, yet here they were, a legion of furies, gunning them down, hurling grenades and home-made bombs. Jürgen Stroop, the SS commander in charge of liquidating the Warsaw ghetto, wrote a detailed report of the operation (before being executed as a war criminal). Ms Batalion quotes him only fleetingly. But she is penetrating on the women’s legacy and post-war lives. The handful who survived were often wracked with guilt. Some “self-silenced”. Jewish women were meant to be warm and loving, not killers. A journalist with the American army warned Fruma and Motke Berger, part of the Bielski group made famous in the film “Defiance”, not to talk, because “people would think they were liars, or insane”. Kukielka made a new life in Israel; Klinger committed suicide there in 1958. “They were not human, perhaps devils or goddesses,” wrote Stroop. “Calm. As nimble as circus performers. They often fired simultaneously with pistols in both hands. Fierce in combat, right to the end.” Some died in battle, others in Gestapo prisons or death camps. Their stories, half-buried for so long, are superbly told in this gripping, haunting book. ■