THE ONLINE booking page for “TM”, a new digital-theatre production, doesn’t offer many clues as to the content of the performance. The poster image bears only a mysterious, cultish slogan: “We are many. We are global. We are TM. Join us.” The production is devised by Ontroerend Goed, a Belgian theatre company whose punning name loosely translates as “feel estate”. The group is known for its confrontational, often deeply uncomfortable shows, and has come to be considered an enfant terrible at fringe festivals across Europe. In “The Smile Off Your Face” (2004), a one-on-one theatrical experience, visitors were manhandled down a stairwell, blindfolded and tied in a wheelchair, and then patted, wafted, tickled and interrogated. Several audience members were reported to have left in tears. At each performance of “Audience” in 2011 a young woman in the front row was singled out for sexualised bullying by the actors, supposedly to make a point about the moral choice of others to step in or stand by. (In later performances, the woman was a plant, played by an actor.) And there was “Internal” (2007), in which punters were coaxed to share genuine personal secrets with members of the company. Those revelations were promptly disclosed to the rest of the crowd. Whether or not these performances sound like an appealing way to spend an evening, they raise more questions about “TM”. The shock value of an Ontroerend Goed production depends on in-yer-face physicality and on the actors’ mastery over a room. Online, the balance of power shifts. There is a safe distance offered by a laptop screen and attendees can “leave” the performance at any moment with a single click, without the awkward shuffling along a row of seats. In these conditions, it was hard to see how “TM” could generate the company’s characteristic pressure-cooker discomfort. Even putting the covid constraints aside, might the old routine be wearing thin? Changing ideas about audience welfare and consent—especially with regard to sexual harassment—have made elements of the company’s provocative act look dated. The pandemic has been hailed as a great accelerant, especially in the digital realm. Would it also hasten the mellowing of one of theatre’s most controversial troupes? In a Zoom interview before the show, Alexander Devriendt, Ontroerend Goed’s artistic director, was dismissive of the online plays that he had so far seen: “I seldom had the feeling I needed to be there.” One such production lost the battle for his attention to a video game which he had opened in another window. (The email instructions for “TM” pointedly remind the viewer to close all other applications and watch in full screen.) He confirmed that the switch to digital had presented a serious problem. “Our strengths as a theatre group were the physical presence, the interactive nature. The virtual world feels much more like a one-sided conversation, more like television.” To get around this, Mr Devriendt says, “TM” had to involve a one-on-one exchange—no tuning out or turning cameras off. Each viewer is connected to one of a team of actors, performing remotely from several different countries. Like much online theatre, how this arrangement turns a profit is a mystery; Ontroerend Goed’s website acknowledges support from the Flemish government and from a Belgian arts investment scheme. The benefit of the set-up, according to one of the actors, is that this format can be even more intimate than theatre in the flesh. “Now, we come into your house. I’m in your living room, and I’ve been in people’s garages and bathrooms. That’s another kind of proximity.” With that in mind, your correspondent opened the link to join “TM” at the allotted time with some trepidation. In a pre-show holding room with fellow members of the audience—designed to emulate the role of a theatre bar—attendees chatted nervously. It was a fair bet that one of the group was a plant, or that the video was being recorded for ammunition later. Suddenly, a glossy trailer played, with a benevolent voice-over entreating everyone to join TM, a secret organisation that members nevertheless see everywhere, “even in the mirror”. This reviewer was paired with an actor—a TM “interviewer” who will assess eligibility for membership—and asked a series of questions, as if undergoing psychological examination. The questions became weirder and more intimate. When the point of this is revealed later, it is not for a cruel punchline but an optimistic twist. Mr Devriendt had conceded that he wouldn’t make a show like “Audience” again, but only because the themes were no longer of interest, not because the form had been unethical. “‘Audience’ was about mass manipulation and the dangers of it. So the form also had to be that way. If you make a show about finding connection with people of the world, you don’t have to be so heavy.” After years of starting fights with the audience, it seems that these theatrical provocateurs are asking everyone to get along instead. Performances of “TM” are listed on Ontroerend Goed’s website