Prague: Belonging in the Modern City. By Chad Bryant. Harvard University Press; 352 pages; $29.95 and £23.95 SHE WAS in many ways a quintessential local. She had Czech friends, read Czech books and ate that Bohemian staple, potatoes. But Duong Nguyen Jiraskova, a student who in 2008 began blogging about life in Prague, was also untypical. Brought up in the Czech Republic by Vietnamese parents, she straddled two worlds. She celebrated Christmas—and Tet. She used cutlery, but taught friends to handle chopsticks. “Whenever someone asks me where I feel at home,” she wrote, “I never give a one-word answer.” One-word answers do not feature in this subtle, lyrical book. Like the denizens of many other cities, Praguers have juggled identities for centuries, even if they have only recently chronicled their efforts online. Chad Bryant concentrates on five fascinating individuals, guiding readers through Czech history along the way. He begins in the mid-19th century, when Prague was a Habsburg city and German dominated high culture. That was intolerable for Slav patriots such as Karel Zap, who saw Prague as a kind of Czech Rome; Zap advocated the use of the Czech language and highlighted the glories of Czech culture. He thought only those with a “heightened sense of religiosity and national feeling” should enter St Vitus Cathedral, final resting place of Bohemian kings. Yet for all his zeal, Zap sometimes wrote in German—and once went by the Teutonic-sounding Karl Zapp. Mr Bryant threads such ironies through his book, describing people on the fringes of Prague society who stumbled towards belonging. In the interwar years, when the city was becoming thoroughly Czech, Egon Kisch, a German-speaking Jewish journalist, explored soup kitchens and dive bars that recalled the cosmopolitan mood of earlier decades. Hana Frejkova found peace as an actor in Czechoslovakia’s theatres after her father was condemned in a Stalinist show trial. Vignettes evoke the city’s changing fortunes. In Kisch’s day Prague had official dogcatchers, one of them boasting an 18th-century proclamation from Empress Maria Theresa confirming his family’s hereditary profession. By the 1970s Prague was a striving socialist city, complete with tower blocks and a new metro system. When the first line opened, officials hired women workers to help Praguers navigate an unfamiliar technology—escalators. As Mr Bryant makes clear, Prague has for centuries been a city in flux, each new ruler chiselling his politics into its institutions and infrastructure. That could make it hard for residents, marginalised or otherwise, to keep up. In his most moving chapter, Mr Bryant recounts the life of Vojtech Berger, a carpenter and communist. His views were mistrusted between the wars; but after Czechoslovakia became a communist state in 1948, Berger seems to have been lost: “One wonders if, as a young man, this is what Berger had had in mind.” By the end of the book, readers might conclude that standing outside or against the mainstream—as a Czech nationalist or radical carpenter or Vietnamese immigrant—is what lends characters like these their strength. An upbringing that spans two communities is many things, Ms Nguyen Jiraskova has noted, but never boring. As Mr Bryant observes, cities the world over help people like his subjects find and make homes in their own image. ■