IN THE SMALL Lebanese village of Bechealeh is a grove of 16 olive trees known as the Sisters. Local legend has it that they have stood in the same spot since the time of Noah’s ark. The trees are gnarled and pitted, with twisted branches and hollow trunks. Across the Mediterranean, olive trees symbolise fertility, peace and longevity; these particular trees are said to be the source of the twig that was carried to Noah in a dove’s beak when the biblical floods rolled back. The ancient grove looms large in the Lebanese pavilion at the Venice Architecture Biennale, which opened on May 22nd. The theme of this edition, “How will we live together?”, has elicited diverse responses. The Thai pavilion explores how human beings can live harmoniously with other species through a study of the Kuy, a community who have developed a symbiotic relationship with elephants. At the Peruvian pavilion, a large gate alludes to the walling-off of public spaces in cities across the country. The Irish pavilion reflects on Dubin’s role as the largest data hub in Europe. Hala Wardé designed the Lebanese pavilion in collaboration with Etel Adnan, a 96-year-old writer and artist. Entitled “A Roof for Silence”, the exhibition answers the biennale’s question by asking others: how can empty spaces be used to encourage contemplation, and how can silence create an opportunity for discussion? (Fittingly, the show is located in the cavernous Magazzino del Sale.) The grove in Bechealeh, which has survived for over 1,000 years thanks to the efforts of the villagers, is symbolic of the ideas Ms Wardé wants to explore—in part due to the trees’ dramatic shapes. “Olivéa”, 16 small circular paintings by Ms Adnan are displayed along with 16 black-and-white photographs by Fouad Elkoury, which show the trees close up and draw attention to their sculptural forms. A film (pictured) by Alain Fleischer, a French artist, depicts the stillness and peace of the evergreens at night, set to music composed by Soundwalk Collective, a group of musicians based in New York. The pavilion also contains paintings by Paul Virilio, a French urbanist and philosopher who wrote about technology, speed and power. Entitled “Antiforms”, his paintings of voids are displayed alongside etchings showing the cavities of the olive trees. Also on display are drawings of the patterns of destruction caused by the enormous blast that damaged large areas of Beirut in August, after 2,750 tonnes of ammonium nitrate stored at the city’s port exploded. In the wake of the catastrophe, Ms Wardé’s interest in emptiness became more resonant: the blast left vast areas of the city in ruins, damaged around 640 historic buildings and displaced 300,000 people. The pavilion was re-envisioned to include reflections on the destruction of Lebanon’s capital city and the perils, pitfalls and unexpected possibilities of reconstruction. Broken glass scattered on the floor of the pavilion alludes to the explosion, while the pavilion’s title evokes the thousands who lost their homes. “It’s not just talking about art,” says Ms Wardé. “We’re talking about a country that was completely drowning.” She invited Beirut Heritage Initiative (BHI), a coalition of architects, preservation experts, urban planners and engineers to organise events at the pavilion and raise awareness of the challenges facing the city’s damaged architectural heritage. Many of the affected buildings were located in Mar Mikhael and Gemmayzeh, two neighbourhoods close to the port that contain the largest remaining concentration of Ottoman and French-mandate-era architecture in the city. Capital controls put in place at the end of 2019, coupled with an 85% devaluation of the Lebanese pound, have plunged many people in the country into poverty. Nine months after the explosion few have the means to repair their homes. Restoring Beirut’s architectural heritage will cost $300m, UNESCO says; they are able to provide funds to restore public buildings yet the majority of the damaged buildings are privately owned. BHI hopes that their involvement in the biennale will help raise funds to facilitate reconstruction in the worst-hit neighbourhoods. “One of the main challenges is to maintain the social fabric of the devastated area,” says Fadlallah Dagher, an architect and one of the founders of BHI. “If time flies and people stay out of their homes, they may never come back.” More optimistically, Ms Wardé argues that there is an opportunity to rethink some of the problems that have plagued Beirut for decades, from heavy traffic to a dearth of parks. Drawing on her interest in voids and absences, she points out that by carving out space in the city for a garden, you raise the value of the properties around it. “Bring back public spaces. Reconnect Beirut to the sea,” she says. In Venice the enduring presence of the Sisters, protected and nurtured by the village that has grown up around them, offers proof that urbanism and nature need not be at odds. “A Roof for Silence” continues in Venice until November 21st