BANKING COULD be called the business of time travel. When savers deposit money in a bank, they postpone consumption. When borrowers take out loans they pull future consumption forward. Banks facilitate this by the magic of interest. When they make loans and charge interest, or pay interest on deposits, they are really putting a price on time itself. But when interest rates are zero, or even negative, this trick becomes much harder to pull off. This phenomenon is not new. Interest rates have trended lower for decades and have been below zero in Japan and Europe for half a decade. “We have complained for years about the low interest-rate environment, and I cannot hear that any more”, says Christian Sewing, boss of Deutsche Bank in Germany. “This is a new normal.” In the short term low interest rates can be a boon for profits by stimulating an economy and pushing up asset prices, both of which boost banks. But persistently low interest rates are a thorn in bankers’ side, as they are associated with lower net interest income. It can be hard for banks to pass low deposit rates on as interest rates decline, but they must often lower rates on loans. Mr Sewing understands this well. Although policy rates in Europe have been negative since 2014, it was only last year when he told his employees to grit their teeth and charge negative rates to clients. Bankers across Europe had long worried “well, if we do this, we will lose the client.” This fear proved unfounded. In the past year, many banks have levied negative rates on clients, including Deutsche Bank, which charged them on more than €80bn ($97bn) of deposits. For most banks a “lower-for-longer” environment requires other changes. Starved of net interest income, bankers seek revenue from fees for investment management or security issuance. “The more diversified your set-up the better,” says Mr Sewing.The impulse to diversify seems universal. Michael Brei, Claudio Borio and Leonardo Gambacorta, of the Bank for International Settlements, sampled the activities of 113 large banks in mostly rich countries, where interest rates have been lowest. They found that, as rates approached zero, banks rebalanced away from deposit-taking and lending, which are interest-generating, to intermediation activities that produce fee income. These effects were larger over the long term, suggesting it is not just the mechanical drop in interest income as a share of profits that prompts it, but a deliberate effort to adjust activity. So what if skinny profits irk the bankers? The problem is that their troubles can cause difficulties for everybody else. As bank margins are compressed, their capital is often eroded, which can stymie banks’ ability to lend. Economists have long worried that these dynamics conflict with monetary policy at the lower bound. Cutting interest rates is supposed to stimulate lending, not curtail it. Markus Brunnermeier, at Princeton, and Yann Koby at Brown, call the interest rate below which a further rate cut has depressive effects the “reversal rate”. And they find that the effects are exacerbated where capital constraints are tight, penalising the big banks, and in countries engaging in quantitative easing, which forces banks to hold even more deposits.