The Bookseller of Florence. By Ross King. Atlantic Monthly Press; 496 pages; $30. Chatto & Windus; £25 VESPASIANO DA BISTICCI left school at the age of 11. A man of modest birth, he received his education on the street corners of 15th-century Florence, where philosophers and scholars would meet to debate Renaissance culture. It was in the shady doorways of Via dei Librai, “the Street of Booksellers”, that the young merchant began his ascent to become, in the words of one satisfied client, “king of the world’s booksellers”. In an eloquent biography, Ross King charts his rise to the top. In 1454 a scholar wrote to Vespasiano, requesting books. “Above all,” he insisted, “I beg you to do it quickly, because I am greatly in need of it.” Making handwritten books was a laborious process. To carry out the request, Vespasiano had to engage a large network of contacts. Parchment, made from treated animal hides, had to be procured. An exemplar of the book requested had to be ferreted out from one of Florence’s many private libraries. Most costly, in terms of both time and money, a professional scribe had to be employed to copy the entire work. Vespasiano’s customers included popes and princes, many of whom were as bookish as they were bloodthirsty. It was said of one, Prince Alfonso of Naples, that “never was man more cruel”; he brought his library along with him on military campaigns, storing the books in a special tent. A handwritten codex was an expensive, luxury product. Cosimo de Medici, scion of the Medici banking family, paid Vespasiano an average of 14 florins for each book he bought—almost half of what many professionals made in a year. Renaissance scribes sometimes left notes that give tiny insights into the reality of making books when they were written, not printed. “Here ends the second part of the work,” wrote one, finishing a partial transcription of Thomas Aquinas’s gargantuan “Summa Theologica”. He added that it was “incredibly long, verbose and tedious for the scribe”. Another left a marginal note to complain about poor quality material, writing: “The parchment is hairy.” Johannes Gutenberg’s press, operational from 1450 onwards, is often invoked as a “big bang” moment in European thought, yet the invention of the combustion engine might be a better comparison. It was a bold new technology, one that increased the speed at which things could happen. However, it achieved dominance only gradually. The complicated mechanics of printing were often a problem. Letters were set in a mirror-image of the page they would create: to make the word “pod”, printers would have to arrange the letters as “boq”. The finicky difficulties of the craft inspired the English phrase “mind your p’s and q’s”. Printed books were initially seen as inferior to handwritten ones; they gained legitimacy by imitating the latest fashions in manuscript-making. Crucially, they employed the distinct, round letters that had been developed by Florentine scribes for their legibility. This modern form of writing was modelled on an ancient Roman style, and was known as lectera anticha nuova (“new antique letters”). If Vespasiano was the king of the world’s booksellers, he was also the last in that particular royal line. His own writings were lost for centuries, only to be rediscovered—and printed—more than 400 years after his birth. Though he brought the art of bookmaking to unsurpassed heights, it was the clanking presses that ensured his immortality. In a pleasing irony, English readers can access a handful of translated extracts from his work free by using the world’s oldest digital library, www.projectgutenberg.com.