IT WAS A pivotal year in popular music—a point underlined by “1971: Never A Dull Moment”, a book by David Hepworth, a veteran music writer, as well as “1971: The Year That Music Changed Everything”, a new eight-part documentary series by an Oscar-winning director, Asif Kapadia. Nowhere were the changes more revolutionary than in soul music. Stevie Wonder, Aretha Franklin, Curtis Mayfield, Isaac Hayes, Donny Hathaway and, in particular, Marvin Gaye were blowing open the perceived possibilities of the genre. Yet the event that year that would have the single greatest impact on soul music in the 1970s passed largely unnoticed. An experienced pair of jobbing songwriter-producers, Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff (pictured), founded a new record label in Philadelphia, Mr Gamble’s hometown. Simultaneously emphasising the enterprise’s roots and its ambition, they called it Philadelphia International. They had been inspired by Berry Gordy’s Motown company in Detroit: its business model, its mode of operation and its sense of civic identity. Philadelphia International would go on to rival and then surpass Motown, becoming the preeminent soul label of its era. In a little over a decade, Messrs Gamble and Huff would be credited with releasing or producing more than 170 gold or platinum records. The label’s 50th anniversary is being commemorated with a box set, “Get On Board The Soul Train: The Sound of Philadelphia International Records Volume 1”, collecting the first eight albums released on the imprint. This takes listeners only as far as 1973, at which point the label was just beginning to exert its influence. Mr Gamble and Mr Huff sought to emulate the Motown set-up with a roster of vocal artists for whom a team of writers and musicians would create records in one designated studio. But their approach to the supporting talent differed. In the 1960s, Motown had a tight and relatively compact house band, known as The Funk Brothers, and several sets of songwriters. Come the 1970s, Philadelphia International went the other way, employing a sprawling soul mini-orchestra (which would in due course release its own hits as MFSB), while Mr Gamble and Mr Huff provided the bulk of the songwriting between them. At their base at Sigma Sound Studios, they were initially assisted by Thom Bell. A classically trained producer and arranger, Mr Bell would be key to the development of what became variously known as “Philly soul”, “Phillysound” or—as in the title of a hit from 1974 by The Three Degrees—“TSOP (The Sound of Philadelphia)”. This sound was as smooth, lavish, ornate and expansive as the Motown style had been taut, crisp and succinct. “With its dreamy sophistication, Philly soul was a next-level advance on what had gone before, another dimension to the contemporaneous work of Stevie [Wonder], Marvin [Gaye] and Curtis [Mayfield],” Gavin Martin, a soul aficionado and music writer, says. “It was also the last of the soul music empires, laying the groundwork for the party-down disco era that followed. Philly perfectly bridged those genres.” Those first eight albums feature three acts of particular and lasting note: The O’Jays, Harold Melvin & The Blue Notes, and Billy Paul. The O’Jays were a vocal trio who, said Eddie Levert, the lead singer, had been “on the brink of making it for so long we should have been called ‘The Almosts’.” “Back Stabbers” (1972), their first album for the label, was a breakthrough for both parties. It set their gritty, assertive yet sweetly harmonised delivery against a complex and dramatic backdrop with deep R’n’B grooves and funk-rock arrangements. It delivered hefty hit singles with the title track and “Love Train”. And it put Philadelphia International squarely on the map. Where the O’Jays thrived on artfully sublimated rawness, the Blue Notes specialised in tear-jerking ballads. Their first album, “I Miss You” (1972), is most notable for including the classic “If You Don’t Know Me By Now”. While Melvin received top billing, the song showcased the voice of Teddy Pendergrass, the band’s frontman. Pendergrass would go on to become a major solo star for Philadelphia International in the late 1970s and early ’80s, the embodiment of the era’s lubricious, crooning soul style—all champagne and silk sheets. Long before then, in 1973, the Blue Notes released “The Love I Lost”, a single which sold more than 1m copies. The track is widely credited as the prototype of disco; on it, Earl Young, the drummer, devised the four-to-the-floor pattern that underpins the genre. Billy Paul, who contributed three of those initial eight albums, is a fascinating figure, too, key to the story of the label, and symbolic of its scope. He was an unlikely soul star, with a background as a jazz singer, but it was precisely his range and refinement that made Mr Gamble and Mr Huff see him as the ideal vehicle for their own vision. They were proved right when he enjoyed a mega-hit with the ballad “Me And Mrs. Jones”, the centrepiece of the excellent album “360 Degrees of Billy Paul” (1972). There was also a certain symbolism in the label’s subsequent commercial misstep, when it issued as a follow-up single a catchy funk song titled “Am I Black Enough For You?”. “People weren’t ready for that kind of a song after the pop success of ‘Me and Mrs. Jones’,” Paul would later say, without rancour. “They were looking for a sequel or at least something that wasn’t provocative...if I had released a different track, I may have reached the heights of Michael Jackson.” Mr Martin doesn’t think that is an overstatement. Paul is “the unsung, unwritten spirit of Philadelphia, before, during, and after the label had ceased. Technically, he’s off the scale. He’s a guy who sang ‘Am I Black Enough For You?’ and walked it like he talked it. He’s a true hero of black culture and human endeavour.” It was Paul’s misfortune that his label did not at that moment realise the commercial future of soul, and of Philadelphia International itself, lay with the polished urbanity of “Mrs Jones” rather than the heated defiance of “Black Enough”. Yet the suave path was itself a form of radicalism. Phillysound allowed black music to be aspirational without deracinating itself to appease white sensibilities. It told its audience they had as much right to the best things in life as anybody else. It claimed for itself that privileged psychic space where you do not have to spend every moment fighting for your rights, and where matters of the heart—and the loins—may thus take precedence.