In Memory of Memory. By Maria Stepanova. Translated by Sasha Dugdale. New Directions; 400 pages; $19.95. Fitzcarraldo Editions; £14.99 AS A CHILD, Maria Stepanova adored a game called sekretiki, or “little secrets”. She would dig holes in the ground, line them with foil, fill them with special objects, cover them with glass and bury them in the dirt, to be found by friends in the know. As she grew up to become one of Russia’s most celebrated contemporary poets, writing came to play a similar role in her life. “I begin to love someone or something, information accumulates of its own accord, and I want to write about it, to put that material into a storehouse, to find its unexpected rhythms,” she explains from Moscow. “I want to make a sekretik.” Ms Stepanova’s deepest love is for the past, in particular her own family’s, and her luminous book “In Memory of Memory” is a sekretik devoted to them. After inheriting an archive of her ancestors’ photographs, letters and ephemera, she set out to make sense of the family’s history, traipsing from Paris to Saratov on the Volga and roaming across art, literature and philosophy. Eschewing the traditional quest narrative, she blends memoir, criticism, essay, documentary and travelogue. The book won several literary awards in Russia; on reading it, thinks Yury Saprykin, the founder of Polka, a Russian literary website, “You immediately feel that you are encountering a great work of art.” In Sasha Dugdale’s supple English translation, it is a contender for this year’s International Booker Prize, to be awarded on June 2nd. The story of the author’s Russian-Jewish family is not the stuff of headlines. “Everyone else’s ancestors had taken part in history, but mine seemed to have been mere lodgers in history’s house,” Ms Stepanova writes, confessing “embarrassment” at how seemingly banal their lives were. Her relatives had bit parts in the grand narratives of the 20th century, skirting its catastrophes. And the archive raises as many questions as it answers; her attempts to fill in the lacunae leave her with only “the tongue-twister of my aunts’ names Sanya, Sonya, Soka, a lot of photographs of the nameless and the noteless, some ethereal and unattached anecdotes and the familiar faces of unfamiliar people”. In other hands, such material might fall flat. Ms Stepanova’s learning and lyricism bring it to life. She hears stories about her great-grandmother Sarra that have “the laurel-leaf taste of legend”. She sees hills “the colour of dark copper, rising and falling as evenly as breath”, and blackened villages where new churches gleam “white as new crowns on old teeth”. Little escapes her meditative gaze. “I wanted to create a book with many entryways and exits,” Ms Stepanova says. She muses on everything from vintage clothing to the selfie, from the French philosopher Jacques Rancière to the American artist Joseph Cornell to the Russian poet Grigory Dashevsky. In a particularly thought-provoking chapter, she brings the Russian writers Osip Mandelstam and Marina Tsvetaeva into conversation with the German author W.G. Sebald. She tests out metaphors for memory and methods for enlivening archival material, weaving excerpts of relatives’ letters throughout the book. Some readers may choke on this allusive style, as if drinking from a dusty old glass. Many will find it intoxicating. The myriad references to other thinkers serve a purpose: to weave Russia back into the wider Western cultural fabric. As Ms Stepanova sees it, in the 19th and early 20th centuries Russian culture was part of a shared dialogue and exchange of ideas. Her search for traces of her great-grandmother leads her to Paris, where Sarra studied medicine in the 1910s—as Franz Kafka and Amedeo Modigliani were roaming the same city’s streets. But from the late 1930s an “invisible curtain” divided Russian culture from the West, Ms Stepanova says, and the country became an “exporter of a kind of borderline experience”. Its literature, from Alexander Solzhenitsyn to Varlam Shalamov, came to be seen primarily as “confessional or reportorial material”. By linking writers from across that curtain, she aims to refute the idea that the Russian experience is separate and unique. A passage in which she visits a museum in New York evokes this sense of connection. Coming upon an image of autumn woods, “I begin to cry, very quietly, under my breath, because it’s the very same Moscow wood where I used to walk with my parents once, many thousands of miles ago, and we are now looking at each other again.” As Mr Saprykin puts it, the book “returns us to the sensation of Russia being a part of world culture”. Struggles over memory, Ms Stepanova notes, are not exclusive to Russia. In essays elsewhere, she reflected on the appeals to past greatness that, in 2014, fuelled Russia’s war with Ukraine; her observations could just as well apply to the rhetoric of Trump-era America and Brexit Britain. “The virus has somehow spread around the world,” she laments. (Her output is formid able. She is editor-in-chief of Colta.ru, an online cultural journal; a collection of her essays and verse has been published this year as “The Voice Over”; another book of poetry is out in English as “War of the Beasts and the Animals”.) When the past is prosecuted in this way, suggests Ms Stepanova, it becomes an opportunity “for settling scores, for a kind of conversation about the present that for some reason cannot happen in real time”. This seepage across time is the underlying theme of “In Memory of Memory”, says Stanislav Lvovsky, a Russian poet and critic: “It’s not a story about history, but about how the past lives on in the present.” These disparate battles over memory may be part of the same war, but in Russia they tend to rage at a higher pitch. Her country, Ms Stepanova says, has long had competing channels for memory: an official, state-endorsed narrative, and family stories, which “like lace, have more holes than threads”. Vladimir Putin has made a glorious version of the past, in particular victory in the second world war, a pillar of his statist ideology. Last week, in a meeting with senior officials, Mr Putin declared that “all kinds of Russophobic individuals and unscrupulous politicians are trying to attack Russian history”. He promised “to ensure the continuity of historical memory in Russian society, so that decades and centuries from now, future generations will cherish the truth about the war”. Ms Stepanova makes the dissonance between these ways of thinking clear in a poignant chapter about the siege of Leningrad. A distant relative of hers perished in battle there, writing quaint letters home until his death. She quotes Lydia Ginzburg, a critic who noted from behind the Nazi blockade how the Soviet system “dehumanised the individual to such an extent that he had learnt to sacrifice himself without even realising it”. By contrast, Ms Stepanova imbues individual lives with meaning independent of the collective fate. For her, writing “is always a rescue operation”. Her family’s relics are safely preserved in their sekretik. ■