IN 2008 THE British Museum hosted a blockbuster exhibition about Hadrian, a Roman emperor whose reign (117-138AD) has never ceased to fascinate. Generations of historians have grappled with his personality and probed his interest in the high culture and mystical rites of Greece, his imperial projects stretching from northern Britain to the Nile and his passion for Antinous, a Greek youth. Marguerite Yourcenar, a French-American writer, claimed to have understood Hadrian better than she knew her own father; “Memoirs of Hadrian” (1951), a novel she wrote in the emperor’s voice, is gripping. Nero—another Roman ruler whose name is known to anybody with even a cursory understanding of ancient history—is now the subject of a fresh artistic inquiry. In an exhibition which opens on May 27th, the British Museum encourages visitors to take a more rounded view of an emperor who is generally remembered as a vain, whimsical sadist. Like the Hadrian show, this latest offering has been put together by Thorsten Opper, a curator of Greek and Roman antiquities, this time in collaboration with Francesca Bologna. It showcases 200 objects that challenge people to make up their own minds about Nero. “Was he a young, inexperienced ruler trying his best in a divided society,” the exhibition asks, “or the merciless, matricidal megalomaniac history has painted him to be?” In the conventional story of Nero’s reign (54-68AD), one of the most striking details is the murder on his orders of his mother, Agrippina. It was she who manoeuvred him onto the throne when he was a teenager. At first he went along with her intrigues, but when mother-son relations broke down, they apparently did so in a spectacular way. What does Mr Opper, after careful mulling of all the evidence, make of that? He accepts the charge of matricide but thinks it was perpetrated under pressure from rival power-brokers, “for political rather than personal reasons”. Many of the empire’s most powerful women suffered the same fate, he adds: “This is not to exculpate Nero, but the jubilant reaction in the Senate to Agrippina’s death is the key point to be stressed.” At the heart of the show’s semi-revisionist view are two arguments. All the written sources about Nero, the curators say, are contentious and were penned long after the event. Second, it seems from archaeological evidence that he was popular with many poorer subjects, both in Italy and the Greek-speaking East. Graffiti buried under the ashes of Pompeii offers some indication of this. Nero’s reputation as a mad tyrant reflects propaganda from the elite class of senators, in the curators’ view. These critics found his penchant for performing and playing music on stage undignified; humbler folk thought otherwise. Mr Opper and Ms Bologna are absolutely right to insist that written sources should be interrogated, and that full account must be taken of the political agendas that may have influenced the writers. But their assertion that all writings about Nero were late and biased is itself a contentious one. One broadly accepted fact is that in 64AD there was a terrible blaze in Rome which raged for a week and destroyed most of the city. Nero then built an enormous palace amid the ruins. The colourful detail that Nero played the lyre—or “fiddled”—while Rome burned is a piece of nonsense propagated by, among others, a writer called Cassius Dio, who died in 235AD; it has never been given much weight by modern historians. On the other hand, scholars do take seriously the testimony of Tacitus, a careful, acerbic chronicler who was born in 56AD and studied in Rome in his 20s, at which time memories of Nero would still have been vivid. (His writing was done much later.) Tacitus asserts that Nero, facing suspicions that he might have started the fire, unleashed a wave of persecution against a despised minority, people known as Christians. They were executed in horrible ways: thrown to wild dogs, crucified or “doomed to the flames and burnt, to serve as a nightly illumination” in the imperial gardens. Abominable and deserving of death as the Christians were, Tacitus adds, some Romans actually felt sorry for them. Those people thought that instead of being killed for some legitimate public benefit, Christians were being slain “to glut one man’s cruelty”, which was going just a little too far. Many an academic has combed this passage to see whether it might be a cunning insertion by some Christian scribe, and this cannot be disproved. But on balance Tacitus seems to have meant what he said, and if the text has some hidden pro-Christian agenda, it is well concealed. Nor was Nero a friend of the Jews. On his watch, a fight started in Judaea that culminated in the storming of the Temple in Jerusalem in 70AD. Almost everything about the mysterious imagery in the Book of Revelation, the last book of the Bible, is disputed, but there is a widespread view that the 13th chapter—with its horned beasts and numerological codes—is an allusion to Nero and his depredations in both Rome and Judaea. Like Hadrian, Nero was also involved in quashing rebellion in the empire’s north-western corner, a province called Britain. The show’s exhibits include a broken bronze head of Nero and a hoard of coins left by fleeing Romans: evidence of the chaos caused around 61AD when Boudicca, an indigenous leader, challenged Roman rule in her home region in the east of England. There is also a chain that was used to hold slaves on the Welsh island of Anglesey. These exhibits, the assembly of which in the era of covid was a formidable task, will certainly make visitors think harder about Nero, and the cruel world he inhabited. They will not make people like the emperor any better. Any writer who wants to follow Yourcenar and see inside an emperor’s head will have a hard time with Nero. “Nero: the man behind the myth” continues at the British Museum until October 24th