THE NEOCLASSICAL facade of the Metropolitan Museum in New York was designed with four niches for statues that stood unfilled for more than a century. In 2019, when the Met finally unveiled its first ever “Facade Commission”, the alcoves were occupied by four regal female figures cast in bronze. Though modelled on the caryatid, a classical female architectural support, these women, otherworldly and serene, clad in the coiled garments and ornaments of African nobility, held up nothing but themselves. For the artist, Wangechi Mutu, there could hardly have been a more public expression of the joining of the two halves of herself. Ms Mutu was born and brought up in Nairobi and came to America to study art at the Cooper Union, then at Yale University, where her focus was sculpture. Her first and best-known works, though, were paper collages and paintings that merged the black female body with fantastical, often monstrous bits of animals, machines and plants. Through these hybrid beings from alternative universes, she began exploring traditional ideals of beauty as well as the ways black women were perceived and represented in Western art. Acclaim soon followed, with solo shows at major museums and, in 2015, participation in the Venice Biennale. Then, after more than two decades in New York, her oeuvre dramatically shifted. She had travelled back to Kenya to make a performance film based on the east African legend of the water women, a kind of siren known as the Nguva. Shortly thereafter she opened a second studio in Nairobi, and plunged back into sculpture, making female figures and busts out of wood, feathers, gems and, above all, the red soil of her homeland. “For the longest time my identity was as an immigrant,” she says. “These works have come out of a journey of hoping to be on Kenyan soil to actually being on Kenyan soil.” Like the caryatids at the Met, her new sculptures and collages, most made in Nairobi, are a counterweight to the established canon of white Western art. A major exhibition at the Legion of Honor museum in San Francisco puts Ms Mutu’s imagined beings in dialogue with 19th-century European aesthetics and their hidden narratives of colonialism, patriarchy and racism. The show, called “I Am Speaking, Are You Listening?”, scorches visitors the moment they enter the museum’s court of honour. Beneath Auguste Rodin’s “The Thinker”, which dominates the court, Claudia Schmuckli, the curator, has positioned “Shavasana I & II”, two bronze pieces depicting dead women covered with mats, stiletto heels dangling from their feet (pictured top). Just beyond, two huge female beasts—Mama Ray, a sweeping sea creature, and Crocodylus, a hybrid woman-crocodile—appear ready to lunge through the portal marked “Honneur et Patrie”. Inside, Ms Mutu’s ornamented, deeply tactile figures of wood, soil, stones and shells stand sentinel at the entrance to different galleries, interrogating by their very presence the art contained within. The multimedia artist’s “alternate mythologies” are particularly important in the wake of America’s recent reckoning with racism and sexism, says Thomas Campbell, director of the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco (of which the Legion is a part). Mama Ray and Crocodylus “storm the barricades”, he notes. All the sculptures function “like a Greek chorus, calling out the bigger truth” of institutional exclusion and a need for new readings of both the past and present. Ms Mutu is sometimes described as an Afrofuturist, imagining a diasporic African future enabled by technology. But her view is broader: her own “dual mind” and study of anthropology help her see how seemingly separate traditions are in fact intertwined. She realised that “cultures and things that seem intact have actually been created from all of these bits and pieces and parts. Their wholeness is held together by peoples’ consensus” about hierarchies and prejudices. Yet this consensus, she believes, can be changed: “Through conversation there is a way to get to a place of common understanding.” If Ms Mutu’s early work revolved around questions of identity and how non-white cultures have been “othered”, her work now, toggling between studios in New York and Nairobi, is no longer only “an archaeology of the self”, says Adrienne Edwards, director of curatorial affairs at the Whitney Museum of American Art. “It is also an archaeology of art history itself.” The artist, reconnected to her roots, can now draw on “the gift of a bifurcated life” to imagine new ways forward, Ms Edwards adds. This includes what Ms Mutu calls a “new balance” in historical narratives and human stewardship of the planet that affirms the value of ancient and female knowledge. Her most recent piece, a “dance-prayer-art performance” called “My Cave Call” makes this point forcefully. Filmed in a cave in the Rift Valley in Africa, the origin of human life, Ms Mutu enacts a rebirth ritual and alludes to Africa as a source of what she calls the “divine feminine”. “I worked on it with my eight-year-old daughter, who belongs to the next generation that will hopefully do better at untangling us from our suicidal relationship with our planet,” Ms Mutu says. “We all need to find our own cave—to come to an understanding that this is not how we want things to be.” “Wangechi Mutu: I Am Speaking, Are You Listening?” continues at the Legion of Honor museum until November 7th