ONCE YOU start to notice it, history is hard to overlook in Gwangju. All over town, traffic signs point to sites associated with “5·18”. The three digits stand for May 18th, the day in 1980 when the military dictatorship that then ruled South Korea began cracking down on pro-democracy protests in the south-western city. During the ten-day stand-off that followed, hundreds of civilians, many of them students, were killed by the security forces. Hundreds more were later prosecuted for taking part in the demonstrations. Since then, much has changed in South Korea. The uprising in Gwangju is now widely considered a pivotal event in the country’s journey to democracy. Chun Doo-hwan, the general who ordered the crackdown and assumed the presidency shortly afterwards, was given a suspended prison sentence last year for defaming an eyewitness to the massacre (Mr Chun had continued to deny that helicopters fired on civilians). Only the most ardent right-wingers still gripe about “communist rioters”, a reference to the conspiracy theory, enlisted as justification by the generals, that the protests had been fanned by North Korean agents. What happened in May 1980 is largely established. How to remember the tragedy is much less clear. “I ask myself: what is May 18th, what does it mean to somebody like me who hasn’t experienced the event and doesn’t remember it?” says Minouk Lim, an artist who has grappled with South Korea’s history. Two very different answers to that question about memory and meaning are offered in Gwangju. The national cemetery on the northern outskirts of the city exemplifies the first approach. Officially described as a “sacred spot for democracy”, the solemn, austere place hosts an annual commemoration of the uprising. It is dominated by twin pillars, 40 metres tall, holding an ovular symbol and towering above the graves of many of the massacre’s victims. The monument is flanked by bronze murals and statues depicting scenes and themes from the protests. Visitors are asked to bow their heads respectfully before entering. The graveyard immortalises the heroism of the dead. “Mother, I will fight for democracy, justice and freedom”, reads the gravestone of Jun Young-jin, killed at 17; in an accompanying photo he wears big glasses and a school uniform. Pointing out the grave shared by Yoon Sang-won, one of the protest’s leaders, and his “spirit wife”, Park Gi-sun, a labour activist, a guide recalls a remark Yoon made shortly before he was killed at 29: “Today we lose, but history will remember us as winners.” For many on the country’s left, this curious mix of triumphalism and victimhood, frozen in time, could serve as the basis of an official national identity. Moon Jae-in, the current president, would like to see the spirit of Gwangju celebrated in the constitution. By contrast, a different way to interpret history has been on display in the city in the past few weeks. It is less prescriptive and more visceral. In the middle of extensive parkland, swathes of which serve as illicit vegetable patches for local residents, sit the ruined remains of the former armed forces hospital. During the uprising, protesters who had been tortured were taken there to be treated, only to find themselves face to face with their interrogators once more. Today the wind blows through abandoned corridors, rattling crumbling door frames. Plants crawl through broken windows from the courtyard. Fading notices on peeling walls warn against spilling state secrets, or instruct staff on how to dispense antidepressants. But like other sites around the city linked to May 18th, sections of the hospital were temporarily brought back to life this year by artists commissioned by the Gwangju biennale (an exhibition first held in 1995, in part to perpetuate the democratic values of the uprising). Unlike the cemetery, with its air of permanence, the engagement with the past in the hospital was provisional and questioning. Ms Lim filled part of it with tokens of a much earlier massacre: hundreds of wooden canes, a handful at first but rising in number to fill half a room and then an entire ward, laid out side by side on blue cloth. The intricately carved objects, which Ms Lim has used in her art for years, were crafted by Chai Eui-jin, who survived the slaughter of most of his village by the South Korean army in 1949. (The state blamed the killings on communist guerrillas, whom the soldiers were supposedly pursuing.) Chai lost nine relatives and spent a lifetime trying to get the authorities to acknowledge what had happened, all the while channelling his grief into his carvings. To Ms Lim, it made little sense to think about May 18th as an isolated incident. “It’s part of a long history of state violence that people still know little about.” Painful if neglected memories surfaced throughout the hospital. In the foyer old televisions displayed images of plants, suggesting renewal. The screens sat on blocks of pavement into which Bae Young-hwan had carved excerpts from “March for the Beloved”, an anthem written for the “spirit wedding” of the couple from the national cemetery; the song was recently adopted by protesters in Hong Kong. Moon Seon-hee filled a corridor that leads to the former intensive-care ward with potted daisies. Catching the sunlight filtering through the windows, they were meant to evoke the concept of care (see picture). Loudspeakers placed among the flowers played accounts of the turmoil of 1980, witnessed by children from that time but read by their modern counterparts. In another wing a video installation by Kader Attia, a French artist, showed interviews about trauma from around the world; before it came room after room of prosthetic legs perched on wooden chairs. In another contrast with the national cemetery, here the engagement with the past was itself ephemeral. The artworks are now being dismantled and the hospital turned over to its ghosts—before in the future being converted into a national trauma centre, where psychological scars will be treated in another way. The canes will find a new home. “The past is not a finished story,” says Ms Lim. “It’s ongoing.” ■